=== Metadata ===
{
    "file_name": "avip.pdf",
    "file_path": "/Users/mf0016/Desktop/soe_RAG/resources/avip.pdf",
    "status": "Processed"
}

=== Content ===
 www.vtpi.org  
 
Info@vtpi.org  
 
Phone 250 -508-5150  
 
 
Todd Alexander Litman © 2013 -2022  
You are welcome and encouraged to copy, distribute, share and excerpt this document and its ideas, provided the author is 
given attribution. Please send your corrections, comments and suggestions for improvement.  
 
Autonom ous Vehicle Implementation Predictions  
Implications for Transport Planning  
15 April 2022  
 
By  
Todd Litman  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
 
 
  Waymo’s self-driving  taxis  are a well-publicized example of autonomous vehicle s. 
 
Summary  
This report explores  the impacts of  autonom ous (also called self-driving , driverless or robotic ) 
vehicle s, and their implications for transportation  planning . It investigates how quickly such 
vehicles are  likely to develop  and be deployed  based on experience with previous vehicle 
technologies ; their likely  benefits and costs ; how th ey will affect travel  activity;  and their impacts 
on road, parking and public transit  planning . This analysis indicates that  Level 5 autonomous 
vehicles, able to operate without a driver, may be commercially available and legal to use in 
some jurisdictions by the late 2020 s, but will initially have high costs and limited performance . 
Some benefits, such as independent mobility for affluent non -drivers , may begin in the 20 30s 
but most impacts , including reduced traffic and parking congestion , independent mobility for 
low-income people (and there fore reduced need for public  transit ), increased safety, energy 
conservation and pollution reductions, will only  be significant when  autonomous  vehicles 
become common and affordable , probably in the 20 40s to 2060s, and some benefits may 
require  dedicated autonomous vehicle lanes, which raises social equity concerns .  

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
2 
   
Table of Contents  
Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  3 
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 7 
Autonomous Vehicle Ope rational Models  ................................ ................................ .....................  8 
Benefits and Costs  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  9 
Reduced Driver Stress, Improved Productivity and Mobility  ................................ ................................ ... 9 
Ownership and Operating Costs  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  10 
Traffic Safety and Security  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  13 
External Cost  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  15 
Social Equity Impact s ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  16 
Benefit and Cost  Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  18 
Travel Impacts  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  20 
Development  and Deploymen t Predictions  ................................ ................................ .................  25 
Experience with Previous Vehicle Technology Deployment  ................................ ................................ .. 28 
Deployment Predictions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  29 
Planning I mplications  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  32 
Roadway Design ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 32 
Transportation Pricing  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  32 
Curb Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 32 
Parking Planning  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 32 
Public Transit Needs  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  33 
Other Trends Affecting Travel Demands  ................................ ................................ ................................  33 
Potential Conflicts and Solutions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 37 
Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 38 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 41 
 
 
  
Driving in mixed 
traffic involves 
numerous 
interactions with 
diverse pedestrians, 
animals, bicyclists 
and vehicles, and so 
is more complex 
than flying an 
airplane. (Keith 
Shaw)  

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
3 
 Executive Summary  
Many decision -makers and practitioners wonder how a utonomous ( also called self-driving  or 
robotic ) vehicles (AVs) will affect future travel, and therefore the need for roads, parking 
facilities and public transit services, and what public policies can minimize the problems and 
maximize the benefits of these new technologies. This report explores these issues.  
 
Optimists predict that by 2030, autonomous vehicles will be sufficiently reliable, affordable and 
common to displace  most human driving, providing huge savings and benefits. However, there 
are good reasons to be skeptical. Most optimistic predictions are made by people with financial 
interests in the industry, based on experience with disruptive technologies such as dig ital 
cameras, smart phones and personal computers. They tend to ignore significant obstacles to 
autonomous vehicle development, and exaggerate future benefits.  
 
There is considerable uncertainty concerning autonomous vehicle development, benefits and 
costs, travel impacts, and consumer demand. Considerable progress is needed before 
autonomous vehicles can operate reliably in mixed urban traffic, heavy rain and snow, unpaved 
and unmapped roads, and where wireless access is unreliable. Years of testing and r egulatory 
approval will be required before they are commercially available in most jurisdictions. The first 
commercially available autonomous vehicles are likely to be expensive and limited in 
performance. They will introduce new costs and risks. These con straints will limit sales. Many 
motorists will be reluctant to pay thousands of extra dollars for vehicles that will sometimes be 
unable to reach a destination due to inclement weather or unmapped roads.  
 
Exhibit ES -1 illustrates a utonomous vehicle  user c osts. They  are likely to be more expensive 
than human -driven private vehicles and public transit, but cheaper  than ridehailing and human -
driven taxis. Shared autonomous vehicles will be cheaper but less convenient and comfortable 
than private AVs, so many households , particularly in suburb s and rural areas, will own AVs. 
 
Exhibit ES-1  Cost Comparison  
 
Autonomous vehicles (AVs) are likel y to cost more than human -operated  (HO) private vehicles and public 
transit, but less than human -driven taxis and rideha iling services.  
 $0.00$0.50$1.00$1.50$2.00$2.50
HO car
variable
costsShared AV Public
transitAV variable
costsHD car
average
costsAV
TaxiAV
average
costsRide-
hailingHO
TaxiDollars Per Mile  Autonomous Vehicles (AV)
Human Driven (HD)
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
4 
 Autonomous vehicles will have various benefits and costs, including many external costs (costs 
imposed on other people). All of these impacts should be considered when planning for AVs.  
 
Exhibit ES -2  Autonomous Vehicle Potential Benefits  and Costs   Benefits  Costs/Problems  Internal (user Impacts ) 
Reduced  drivers’  stress  and increased 
productivity . Motorists  can rest, play and work 
while travelling .  
Mobility for non -drivers.  More  independent 
mobility for non -drivers  can reduce motorists ’ 
chauffeur ing burdens and  transit  subsidy needs .  
Reduced paid driver costs.  Reduce s costs for taxis 
services and commercial transport  drivers . Increase d vehicle  costs.  Requires additional vehicle 
equipment,  services and fees . 
Additional  user  risks.  Additional crashes caused by  system 
failures, platooning, higher traffic speeds, additional risk -
taking, and increased total vehicle travel . 
Reduced s ecurity and privacy.  May be vulnerable to 
information abuse (ha cking), and features such as location  
track ing and data sharing may r educe privacy . External (Impacts on others)  Increased safety.  May reduce crash  risks and 
insurance costs. May reduce high -risk driving .  
Increased road capacity  and cost savings . More 
efficient vehicle traffic may  reduce  congestion 
and roadway costs.  
Reduced parking costs.  Reduces demand for 
parking at destinations . 
Reduced energy consumption and pollution . May 
increase fuel efficiency and reduce emissions.  
Supports vehicle  sharing . Could facilitate 
carsharing  and ridesha ring, reducing total vehicle 
ownership and travel, and associated costs . Increased infrastructure costs. May require higher roadway 
design and maintenance standards.  
Additional risk s. May increase risks to other road users and 
may be used for criminal acti vities.  
Increased traffic problems . Increased vehicle travel may 
increase congestion, pollution and sprawl -related costs . 
Social equity concerns.  May reduce affordable mobility 
options including  walking, bicycling and transit services.  
Reduced employment . Jobs for drivers may decline.  
Reduced support for other solutions . Optimistic predictions 
of autonomous driving  may discourage other transport 
improvements and management strategies.  
Autonomous vehicles can provide various benefits and costs, including external impacts on other people.  
 
 
Vehicles last longer, cost more, impose larger external costs, and are more highly regulated 
than most other consumer goods. As a result, vehicle tec hnologies take longer to penetrate 
markets than most other sectors. It will probably take decades for autonomous vehicles to 
dominate new vehicle purchases and fleets, and some motorists may resist using them.  
 
Optimistically, autonomous vehicles will be s afe and reliable by 2025 , and  may be commercially 
available in many areas by  2030. If they follow the pattern of previous vehicle technologies, 
during the 2030s and probably the 2040s, they will be expensive and limited in performance, 
sometimes unable to reach a desired destination or requiring human intervention when they 
encounter unexpected situations . Customers will include affluent  high -annual -mileage 
motorists and businesses.  For the foreseeable future most moderate - and low -income 
households will co ntinue to use human -operated vehicles.  
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
5 
 Shared autonomous vehicles (s elf-driving taxi s) and rides  (micro-transit services)  may be widely 
available by the  2030s. Shared vehicles  have moderate operating costs, and offer moderate 
convenience and comfort. They should  be cheaper than current taxi and ridehailing services,  
but offer lower quality service since no driver will be available to assist  passengers , provide 
security, or clean vehicles . Vehicle dispatching will sometimes be slow and unpredictable, 
parti cularly in suburban and rural areas . Shared rides  will have the lowest costs but the least 
convenience and comfort . Because of their high labor costs and predictable routes, long -haul 
buses and freight trucks are particularly appropriate for autonomous operation, so self -driving  
buses and trucks may become common in the 2030s and 2040s.  
 
The figure below illustrates t hese market penetratio n and benefits projection s. This indicates 
that it will probably be 2045 before half of new vehicles are autonomous, 2060 before half of 
the vehicle fleet is autonomous, and possibly longer due to technical challenges or consumer 
preferences. Level 4 autonomy (able to operate autonomously under limited conditions, such 
as on grade -separated highways) can reduce driver stress and increase productivity, but most 
benefits require Level 5 autonomy (able to operate autonomously under all no rmal conditions) 
so vehicles can transport non -drivers and travel empty to pick up or drop off passengers.  
 
Exhibit ES-2      Autonomous Vehicle Sales, Fleet , Travel and Benefit Projection s 
 
This analysis suggests that it will be at least 2045 before half  of new vehicles are autonomous, and 2060 
before half of the vehicle fleet is autonomous. Significantly faster deployment will require scrapping many 
otherwise functional vehicles that lack self -driving ability. Some benefits, such as reduced driver stress  and 
independent mobility for affluent non -drivers, can occur when autonomous vehicles are relatively costly 
and rare. However, most benefits, such as independent mobility for moderate -income non -drivers and 
affordable taxi and micro -transit services, can only be significant if they become common and affordable, 
and some benefits, such as reduced congestion, will require dedicated lanes to allow platooning.   
 

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
6 
 Many predictions assume that most autonomous vehicles will be electric, which have low fuel 
costs but require costly batteries and currently pay no fuel taxes. Incorporating battery 
replacement costs and efficient road user fees increases electric vehicle operating costs to be 
similar to fossil fuel vehicles.  
 
An important planning issue is whether aut onomous vehicles will increase or reduce total 
vehicle travel and associated traffic problems. It could go either way. By increasing non -drivers’ 
vehicle travel, increasing travel convenience and comfort, reducing vehicle operating costs, 
generating empty travel, and encouraging longer -distance commutes and more sprawled 
development, they can increase vehicle travel. This additional vehicle travel provides marginal 
consumer benefits, and since vehicle travel imposes significant external costs, much of the 
additional vehicle travel is likely to be economically inefficient: its user benefits will be less than 
total incremental costs. Alternatively, autonomous operation may facilitate vehicle sharing, 
allowing households to reduce vehicle ownership and vehicle travel. This suggests that AVs will 
increase vehicle travel in suburban and rural areas, and reduce it in urban areas. Their net 
impacts will depend on transport and land use development policies. With current policies, 
vehicle travel and sprawl are likely  to increase 10 -30%. More efficient pricing, and roadway 
management which favors shared vehicles, can reduce vehicle travel and associated problems.  
 
Another critical issue is the degree that potential benefits can be achieved when only a portion 
of vehicl e travel is autonomous. Some benefits, such as improved mobility for affluent non -
drivers, may occur when autonomous vehicles are uncommon and costly, but many potential 
benefits, such as reduced congestion and emission rates, reduced traffic signals and l ane 
widths, require that vehicles operate autonomously in dedicated lanes.  
 
Autonomous vehicle implementation is just one of many trends likely to affect future transport 
demands and impacts, and not necessarily the most important. Their ultimate impacts depend 
on how autonomous vehicles interact with other trends, such as shifts from private to shared 
vehicles. Autonomous vehicles will probably not be a “ game changer ” during most of our lives, 
and will only cause a “ paradigm shift ” if this technology caus es large shifts from private to 
shared vehicles and creates more multi -modal communities.  
 
Transportation professionals have important roles to play in autonomous vehicle development 
and deployment. We must anticipate how new technologies and services are  likely to affect 
road, parking and public transit needs, and how to respond to minimize problems and maximize 
total benefits. We can help define the standards they must meet to legally operate on public 
roads. We should evaluate their benefits and costs a nd develop policies to maximize net 
benefits and ensure that their deployment supports strategic community goals.  
 
 
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
7 
 Introduction  
The future is ultimately unknowable but planning requires predicting impending  conditions and 
needs. Many decision -makers and  practitioners (planners, engineers and analysts) wonder how 
autonomous (also called self-driving  or robotic ) vehicle s will affect  future  travel  demands , and 
therefore the need for  road s, parking  facilities  and public  transit services,  and what public 
policies can minimize the ir risks and maximize the ir benefits  (APA 2016;  Berrada and Leurent 
2017;  Grush and Niles 2018 ; Guerra 2015;  Kockelman and Boyles 2018 ; Larco 2022;  Milakis, van 
Arem and van Wee 2017 ; Shaheen, Totte and Stocker  2018; Sperling 2017 ).  
 
There is considerable uncertainty about thes e issues . Optimists  predict , based on experience 
with previous technological innovations such as digital cameras , smart phones  and personal 
computers,  that autonomous vehicles will  soon  be sufficiently  reliable and affordable  to replace  
most human  driving , provid ing huge savings and benefits  (Johnston and Walker 2017; Keeney 
2017; Kok, et al. 2017) . However, there are  good  reasons to be skeptical  of such  claims .  
 
Optimistic predictions often overlook  significant obstacles  and costs.  Many technical pro blems 
must be solved before autonomous vehicles  can operate  reliably  in all normal  conditions  
(Knight 2020 ; Leonard, Mindell and Stayton 2020 ; Norton 2021 ). They will require years of 
testing and regulatory approval , and must  become affordable  and attractive to consumers . 
Motor vehicles are costly,  durable, and highly regulated , so new vehicle technologies  generally  
require decades  to penetrate fleets . Autonomous driving can create new  problems ; a camera , 
telephone or computer failure may be frustrating but is seldom fatal; motor vehicle system 
failures can be frustrating and deadly to occupants and other road users . As a result, 
autonomous vehicles will probably take longer to develop and provide smaller  net benefits than 
optimists predict.  
 
This has  important  policy implications  (Papa and Ferreira 2018 ; Speck 2017 ). Vehicles  rely on 
public infrastructure and  can impose large external costs, and so require more planning and 
regulation  than most other tech nologies. For example,  many predicted autonomous vehicle  
benefits, including congestion and pollution reductions , require dedicated lanes to allow  
platoon ing (numerous vehicles driving close together at relatively high speeds) , and 
autonomous vehicles can be programed to prioritize user benefits  such as maximizing travel 
speed and  occupant comfort, or community benefits such as  minimiz ing delay and risks to other  
road users . Policy makers must  decide  whether to build special  autonomous vehicle lanes, how 
to price them, and how to regulate their operation in maximize total benefits  (Zipper 2021) . 
 
This report explores  these issues.  It investigates , based on experience with previous vehicle 
technologies , how quickly self -driving v ehicles are likely to be developed and deployed, 
critically evaluates their benefits and costs, and discusses their likely travel impacts  and their 
implications for planning decisions such as optimal road, parking and public transit supply.   
 
 
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
8 
 Autonomous  Vehicle Operational Models  
Exhibit 1 describes the five levels of  autonomous driving. Level  4 offers autonomous mobility 
under some conditions and Level 5 offers autonomous mobility under all normal conditions .  
 
Exhibit 1 Automated Driving Levels (SAE  J3016 2014)  
 
The Society of Automotive Engineers ( SAE) defines five vehicle automation levels. Most predicted benefits 
require level 5, which allows vehicles to transport non -drivers and goods, and travel empty.  
 
 
Exhibit 2 compares four vehicle operating m odels . 
 
Exhibit  2 Operating Models Compared  
 Private  Human -
Driven Vehicle s Private  Autonomous 
Vehicle s Shared Autonomous 
Vehicle s Shared 
Autonomous Ride s 
 Motorists own  or lease,  
and drive , a vehicle.  Households  own or lease 
self-driving vehicle s. Self-driving taxis offer 
serve individuals . Micro-transit serve s 
multiple passengers . 
Advantages  Low costs. Always 
available. Users can 
leave  gear in vehicles. 
Pride of ownership.  High convenience. 
Always available. Users 
can leave gear in 
vehicles. Pride  of 
ownership.  Users can choose vehicles 
that best meet their 
needs. Door to door 
service.  Lowest  total  costs. 
Minimizes 
congestion, risk and 
pollution emissions.  
Disadvantages   
Requires driving ability, 
and associated stress.  High costs. Users cannot 
choose different vehicles 
for different uses.  Likely 
to increase vehicle travel 
and associated costs.  Users must wait for 
vehicles. L imited services  
(no driver to help 
passengers  carry luggage 
or ensure safety .  Least  speed,  
convenience  and 
comfort, partic ularly 
in sprawled areas.  
Appropriate 
users  Lower - and moderate -
income suburban and 
rural residents.  Affluent suburban and 
rural residents . Lower -annual -mileage 
users.  Lower -income urban 
residents.  
Autonomous vehicles can be p rivate  or shared. Each model has advantages and disadvantages.   

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
9 
 Benefits and Costs  
This section describes  autonomous vehicle  benefits and costs.  
 
Reduced Driver Stress, Improved Productivity and Mobility  
Autonomous vehicles  can reduce driver s’ stress and tedium , and increase their productivity . 
They  can be mobile offices and bedrooms, as illustrated below , allowing passengers to  rest or  
work while travelling  (WSJ 2017) . This reduce s travel ti me unit costs  (cost per hour) . However, 
for safety sake occupants  should wear seatbelts , restricting use of in -vehicle beds , and like any 
confined space, vehicle interiors are likely to  become cluttered and dirty  (Broussard 2018) . 
 
Exhibit 3  Productivity and Relaxation While Travelling  
  
Autonomous vehicles  can be mobile offices and bedrooms , allowing traveler s to work and rest.  
 
 
Self-driving vehicles can introduce new stresses and discomforts.  Traveler s may experience 
“access anxiety ” if vehicles are sometimes unable  to reach desired destinations, for example, 
due to heavy rain  or snow , or if an area lacks the detailed maps required for autonomous 
operation (Grush 2016).  Self-driving taxi and micro -transit services will be cheaper than human -
operated taxis but offer lowe r service quality  since t here will be no drivers to help carry 
packages or ensure passenger safety. To minimize cleaning and vandalism costs most surfaces 
will be stainless steel and plastic, and security cameras  will monitor passengers, yet they  may 
still encounter previous occupants’ garbage, stains and odors  (Broussard  2018) . Shared 
autonomous rides (micro -transit) require passengers to share space with strangers, and each 
additional pick -up or drop -off can impose delay s, reducing speeds and reliability .  
 
Autonomous vehicles can provide independent mobility for people  who for any reason cannot 
or should not drive. This direct ly benefits those traveler s, and by improv ing their access to 
education and employment opportunities, can increase their  productivity , and reduce 
chauffeuring burdens on their family members and friends . On the other hand, o ptimistic 
predictions of autonomous vehicle benefits may cause some communities to reduce support 
for public transit services which may reduce mobility options for non -drivers  (Creger, Espino 
and Sanchez 2019 ). Dedicating highway lanes for autonomous vehicle platooning may reduce 
capacity for human -operated traffic , harming  human -operated vehicle  occupants . 
  

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
10 
 Ownership and Operating Costs  
Autonomous vehicles require  various  equipment and services summarized in the box below.  
Currently,  a set of  optional vehicle accessories , such as remote starting,  adaptive cruise control , 
active lane assist  and safety camera s, typically cost several thousand dollars , and subscriptions 
to navigation and security services, such as OnStar and TomTom, cost $ 150-750 annually .  
 
Exhibit 4  Autonomous Vehicle Equipment and Service Requirements  
All Autonomous  Vehicles  Shared  Autonomous  Vehicles  
 Sensors (optical, infrared, rad ar, laser , etc. ). 
 Automated controls (steering, braking, signals, etc.)  
 Software , servers and power supplies.  
 Short range vehicle -to-vehicle communication  
networks, plus Internet  access for maps, software 
upgrades and  road reports.  
 Navigation . GPS systems  and special  maps.  
 Critical component maintenance , repair and testing .  Dispatching and fleet management.  
 Business administration  and insurance.  
 Business profits.  
 Security.  
 Frequent cleaning and repairs.  
 Delays and e mpty vehicle -miles for passenger  
loading . 
Autonomous vehicles, particularly those that are shared, will incur additional costs.  
 
 
Since failure s could  be deadly , autonomous vehicles will need robust and redundant 
components , installed and  maintained by specialists, increasing maintenance costs.  Current 
advanced driver assistance system sensors (cameras, radar and ultrasound) approximate ly 
double minor collision damage  costs, typically adding $3,000 to a repair bill  (AAA 2018) , 
suggesting that autonomous vehicles will increase vehicle repair cost s. 
 
Cleaning and Repairs – Often Overlooked Cost s 
Although most autonomous taxi passengers are likely to be courteous and responsible, some will 
probably be messy and a few will be vandalous. To discourage abuse, autonomous taxis  interiors will be 
hard metal and plastic services, with surveillance cameras , which may reduce but cannot eliminate these 
problems, so vehicles will occasionally have garbage, unpleasant odors, or damage. Autonomous taxis 
will probably need cleaning every 5 -15 trips, plus occasi onal repairs. Assuming $5 -10 per cleaning this 
will add $0.33 -2.00 per trip, plus travel time and costs for driving to cleaning stations.  
 
 
Optimists often assume that most autonomous vehicles will be electric, which they predict  will 
have low operating c osts (less than 5₵ per mile ), but these are underestimates. Vehicle 
batteries must be replaced  approximately  every 100,000 miles , which currently costs $3,000 -
15,000, or 3-10₵ per vehicle -mile. This may decline with production innovations, but probably 
not much since  future vehicles will require increasingly sophisticated  batteries  to maximize 
performance . Electric vehicles currently pay no fuel taxes ; cost-recovery road -user fees would 
increase electric vehicle operating costs 5 -10¢ per vehicle -mile. Incor porating these factors 
increases electric vehicle operating costs to 10 -25₵ per mile, similar to fossil fuel  vehicles.  
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
11 
 What are Efficient Road User Fees?  
Efficient road user fees recover roadway costs, with additional charges  for congestion, crash  and 
pollution damages  imposed on others. Government roadway expenditures total about $250 billion 
annually which serves about 3,200 billion  vehicle -miles, which averages about 8₵ per mile (FHWA 2016); 
optimal fees are somewhat  lower fees for automobiles and highe r for heavy vehicles which impose 
greater roadway costs. Under urban -peak conditions, decongested fees of 5 -25₵ per mile are typically 
required to reduce traffic volumes to roadway capacity. In addition, any electric vehicle emission fees 
should be distanc e-based so drivers pay according to the amount they drive and the costs they impose.  
 
 
Experience with previous vehicle innovations, such as automatic transmissions and airbags, 
suggests that autonomous driving capability will initially be available only on higher priced 
models and will  probably  take decades to become standard on lower -priced models.  
 
This suggests that autonomous driving capabilities will probably  add several  thousand dollars  to 
new vehicle purchase prices  and hundreds of dollars in addi tional annual services, maintenance 
and repair costs . In total this should add  a few thousand dollars in annualized expenses, at least 
for the first few decades of their commercial availability , until competition and depreciation 
make these  technologies av ailable on cheaper  models and used vehicles.  
 
Some a dvocates argue  that these add itional costs will be offset by insurance and fuel cost 
savings  (Intellias 2018)  but that seems  unlikely. For exam ple, if autonomous driving reduces 
collision insurance costs by half, the $300 -500 annual savings is  just 10 -20% of estimated  
additional costs. Fuel cost savings are also likely to be small and a dditional equipment and 
larger vehicles to serve as mobile offices  and bedrooms  may  increase rather than reduce energy 
consumpt ion.  
 
This suggests  that for the foreseeable  future private auton omous vehicle  costs  will probably 
average  $0.80-$1.20 per  vehicle -mile , which may  eventually decline to $0.60 -$1.00 per mile  as 
the technology b ecomes available in cheaper  models. Shared autonomous vehicles  (self -driving 
taxis) will probably  cost $0.50 to $1.00 per vehicle -mile , and sh ared autonomous rides  will 
probably cost  $0.20 -0.40 per passenger -mile  (Nunes and Hernandez 2020) . This is cheaper than 
human -operated taxis  ($1.50 to  $3.00 per mile), but more expensive than  personal vehicle  
operating costs  or public transit  fares  (20-40¢ per passenger -mile).  
 
Some studies estimate lower costs. For example, Kok, et al. (2017) predict that shared, electric 
autonomous vehicles will cost less than 10¢ per mile, cheap enough  that many  trips could be 
funded through advertising , but  such  estimates ignore costs such as cleaning  and vandalism 
repairs , profits, empty vehicle  travel , insurance ( many  assume 90%  lower insurance premiums ), 
and roadway user fees , and so are probably underestimates . 
 
Autonomous vehicles can provide particularly large savings for commercial vehicles, such as 
freight trucks and buses, due to their high labor costs. However, this will not necessarily 
eliminate  the need for on -board workers since many delivery vehicles require an operator to 
unload goods, and buses may still need conductors to provide passenger services and security.  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
12 
  
Exhibit 5 Cost Comparison (AAA 2017; Bösch, et al. 2017; Johnson and Walker 20 17; 
Keeney 2017; Litman 2009; Stephens, et al. 2016)  
 
Autonomous vehicles  (AVs)  are likely to  cost more than human -driven private vehicles ( HVs) and public 
transit , but less than human -driven taxis and ridehailing services .  
 
 
Exhibit s 5 and 6  compare estimates  user costs. Average costs  are what traveler s consider when 
deciding whether to purchase a vehicle; variable (operating) costs are what vehicle owners 
consider when deciding how to make a particular trip. Electric autonomous vehicles  are likely to  
be cheaper  to operate than  most  current vehicles . Shared autonomous vehicles  will be cheaper 
than taxi and ridehailing services but more expensive than the variable costs of a current 
automobile , but  can provide overall savings for people who travel less than about 6,000 annual 
vehicle -miles. This will increase vehicle travel and total costs by autonomous vehicle owners, 
but reduce vehicle travel and costs for those who shift from owning to shar ing vehicles.  
 
Exhibit 6 Variable Costs   
 Although automobile s are 
expensive to own  they are 
relative ly cheap to drive , with 
variable  costs (fuel, tire wear , 
etc.) currently averaging 
about 20₵ per vehicle mile. 
This is more than an electric 
autonomous vehicle  but less 
than shared autonomous rides 
and vehicles, ride hailing and 
taxi services.  
 
 
Public policies will affect these costs. Governments  may  impose  new  road user fees  to recover 
roadway costs and reduce traffic problems , which would increase electric  vehicle  operating 
costs and make shared vehicle travel more attractive.  $0.00$0.50$1.00$1.50$2.00$2.50
HD car
variable
costsShared AV Public
transitAV variable
costsHD car
average
costsAV
TaxiAV
average
costsRide-
hailingHD
TaxiDollars Per Mile  Autonomous Vehicles (AV)
Human Driven (HD)
$0.00$0.50$1.00$1.50$2.00$2.50
Private AV Current
AutomobileShared AV
RideShared AV Ridehailing TaxiDollars Per Mile  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
13 
 Traffic Safety  and Security  
Optimists claim that, because human error contributes to 90% of crashes, autonomous vehicles 
will reduce crash rates and insurance costs  by 90% (Kok, et al. 2017; McKinsey 2016) , but this 
overlooks additional risks these technologies can introduce ( Hsu 2017;  ITF 2018;  Kockelman, et 
al. 2016;  Koopman and Wagner 2017; Ohnsman  2014 ). 
 Hardware and software failures.  Complex electronic systems often  fail due to  false sensor s, 
distorted sig nals and  software error s. Self -driving vehicles will certainly have failures  that 
contribute to crashes , although their frequency is difficult to predict  (Dawn Project 2022) . 
 Malicious hacking. Self-driving technologies can be manipulated for amusement or crime.   
 Increased risk -taking.  When traveler s feel safer they tend to  take additional risks, c alled 
offsetting behavior  or risk compensation . For example, autonomous vehicle  passengers may 
reduce  seatbelt  use, and other road users may be less cautious  (Millard-Ball 2016) , described  as 
“over -trusting” technology (Ackerman 2017).  
 Platoon ing risks . Many potential benefits, such as reduced congestion and pollution emissions, 
require platooning  (vehicles operating close together at high speeds on dedicated lanes ), which 
can introduce new risks , such as human drivers joining platoons and increased crashes severity.   
 Increased total vehicle travel.  By improving convenience and comfort autonomous vehicles may 
increase total vehicle travel and therefore  crash exposure (Trommer, et al. 2016; WSJ 2017) .  
 Additional risks to non -auto traveler s. Autonomous vehicles may have difficulty detecting  and 
accommodating pedestrians, bicyclists and motorcycles  (PBIC 2017).  
 Reduced investment in conventional safety st rategies.  The prospect of autonomous vehicles may 
reduce  future efforts to improve driver safety  (Lawson 2018) . 
 Higher vehicle repair costs due to additional equipment . Additional sensors and control systems, 
and increased quality control, are likely to si gnificantly increase collision repair costs  (AAA 2018) . 
 
 
These new risks will probably cause crashes, so autonomous vehicles will not really achieve  the 
90% crash reductions that advocates predict . After analyzing  traffic crash  risk factors,  Mueller, 
Cicchino, and Zuby (2020)  concluded that by improved sensing  and response, autonomous 
vehicles could prevent up to 34% of crashes, and more if the technology eliminates all traffic 
violations, but predictions of 90% crash reductions are exaggerated . Sivak  and Schoettle  
(2015 a) conclude that autonomous vehicles will have crash rates similar to  an average driver, 
and total crashes  may increase  when autonomous  and human -driven vehicles mix.  Groves  
and Kalra  (2017) argue  that autonomous vehicle deployment is ju stified even if the y only 
reduce crash rates 10% , but total crashes can increase  if autonomous operation  increases  total 
vehicle travel , for example, if they  reduce per-mile crash rates 10% but increase vehicle travel 
12% , total crash es, including risks to  other road users, will increase.  
 
Autonomous vehicles are vulnerable to hacking. In one experiment , researchers demonstrated 
that adding graffiti -like marks to a roadside stop -sign caused software to read an inaccurate 
“Speed Limit 45” (Eykholt, et al. 20 18). There will be an on -going arms race between hackers 
and software designers over  autonomous vehicles control , which will add costs and risks . 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
14 
  
Autonomous vehicles  currently  have relatively high  operational  failure rates . For example, the 
Dawn Project’s Tesla Full Self -Driving Safety Analysis  found that the latest version of the Tesla 
software would normally fail a standard driving test, with about one maneuver error every 
three minutes and one critical error every ten mi nutes . In 201 9, the best  test vehicles 
experienced one disengagement  (when human drivers over rode automated systems ) per 
16,666  miles , but most were more frequent  (Hyatt 2020 ). These examples  indicate  that 
autonomous vehicle operating technologies are not ready for  broad  implementation.  
 
Shared autonomou s vehicles may  reduce crashes by providing more affordable alternatives to 
higher -risk drivers . Efforts to reduce higher -risk driving, such as graduated driver’s licenses, 
special testing for senior drivers,  and anti -impaired driver campaigns, can be more effective and 
publicly acceptable if affected groups have convenient and affordable mobility options.  For 
example, parents may purchase autonomous vehicles for their teenagers, and travelers may 
use autonomo us vehicles after drinking alcohol or taking drugs . 
 
Many factors will affect these  impacts, including how v ehicles are program med, and how they 
affect  total vehicle travel. For example, to increase travel speeds autonomous vehic les can be 
programmed to take m ore risks and shortcuts through neighborhoods, to minimize traffic 
problems  they can be program med to drive slower and avoid congested roads and 
neighborhood streets . For example, Tesla’s self -driving software allows  drivers to choose a 
faster,  “asse rtive”  operating mode  which frequently violates traffic laws  (Wilson 2022).  
 
The Autonomous Vehicle Trolley Problem  
“The trolley problem” refers to various scenarios that ethicists use to consider who should be protected 
from  an out -of-control vehicle , for example, if it should be directed  to kill fewer  rather than more , older 
rather than younger, or more rather than less productive people.  Although  all vehicles face these tra de-
offs, decisions by human drivers  are generally  spontaneous;  with autonomou s vehicles they are  explicitly  
programed. This raises a public policy issue: who should decide how vehicle s are programed when 
making  risk trade -offs. 
 
For example , should autonomous vehicles operate at legal speed  limits  or to match average traffic 
speeds  on a roadway ? How should they prioritize risks to vehicle occupants over risks to other road 
users? How should an autonomous vehicle respond if faced with unexpected conditions?  To protect 
other road users and minimize other external costs, p rofessional o rganizations should provide guidance 
concerning how autonomous vehicles should be programed to trade -off costs and risks , and 
governments should  establish regulations to ensure that autonomous vehicles are programed.  
 
 
Sohrabi, Khreis a nd Lord (2020) iden tified 32 pathways through which autonomous vehicles can 
affect public health, of which 17 are negative and 8 are  positive . To maximize health  benefi ts 
they recommend transportation  demand management policies to favor shared, electric 
autonomous vehicles and prevent increases in total vehicle travel.    
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
15 
 External Cost  
Optimists  claim that  autonomous driving  will significantly  reduce external costs including traffic 
congestion, parking costs, crash risks and  pollution emissions , but these impacts are uncerta in 
(Eddy and  Falconer  2017 ; Rodier 2018 ; TRB 2019 ). Under many circumstances they may 
increase  some  external costs . For example, if programmed to maximize passenger safety and 
comfort so they can rest or work while travelling they will reduce traffic speed s. Unless 
implemented  with effective demand management  incentives  they  are likely t o increase total 
vehicle travel , traffic problems  and sprawl,  which can increase total congestion, crashes  and 
pollution and other costs  (Nadafianshahamabadi, Tayarani  and Rowangould 2021) . Some 
benefits require dedicated lanes for platooning ( Guhathakurta and Kumar 2019; Heaslip, et al. 
2020) , which are costly and only feasible on some  highways, and  they may require special signs, 
roadway markings, signals  and transpon ders  that add costs  (Lawson 2018). Shared a utonomous  
vehicles  will need  docking stations and  passenger loading areas  (Marsden, Docherty and 
Dowling  2020; Zhang and Wang 2020) .  
 
Exhibit 7  Driverless Car “Platooning” (Chuen, et al. 2013)  
  
Many proposed autonomous 
vehicle benefits, including 
reduced congestion , fuel 
consumption and emission s, 
require platooning: multiple 
electrically connected vehicles 
travelling close together at 
relatively high speeds, preferably 
lead by a large truck. Thi s 
requires dedicated highway 
lanes.  
 
 
Optimists often assume that most autonomous vehicles will be electric, which reduce but do 
not eliminate pollution emissions, since a major portion of electricity is generated by pollution -
emitting fossil fuels (Larco , et al. 2018; Reighmuth 2020) , and electric vehicles produce non -
exhaust particulate emissions from brake, tire and road wear, which are a major health hazard, 
particularly in dense urban areas (Air Quality Expert Group 2020).  
 
Overall  impacts will depen d on how autonomous vehicles  are designed and regulated. If 
programmed for maximum caution and passenger comfort , they will drive slowly and 
frequently stop to when faced with unexpected conditions, which will  reduce t raffic speeds and 
cause  delays (Le Vine,  Zolfaghari  and Polak  2015) . If programmed to maximize travel speeds 
they may incr ease risks to other road users and take shortcuts through neighborhoods.  
  

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
16 
 Social Equity Impacts  
Autonomous vehicles are likely to hav e various social  equity impacts , as summarized below . 
1. Horizontal e quity  with respect to subsidies  
A basic economic principle is that markets (a transport  system can be considered a market for 
mobility ) are most efficient and equitable if prices (what consumers pay to use a good) reflect 
the costs of producing that good , or described differently,  consumers should generally “get 
what they pay for and pay for what they get” unless subsidies are specific ally justified.   
 
To reduce  congestion, crash  risk, energy consumption and pollution emissions autonomous 
vehicles require dedicated travel lanes , and electric vehicles currently receive large purchase 
subsidies and are exempt from the road user fees that fossil fuel vehicle users pay through fuel 
taxes . As a result, without  new  cost-recovery pricing systems, electric autonomous vehicles may  
receive inequitable subsidies . 
2. External  traffic  costs  
External  traffic  costs  (congestion, pedestrian delay,  road and parking facility costs, crash risk 
and pollution emissions that vehicle tr avel imposes on other people ) are inequitable.   
 
Optimists predict that electric autonomous vehicles will reduce these costs, but their actual 
impacts are uncertain, and will depend on whether they induce more total vehicle travel, and 
public policies. If given dedicated lanes, autonomous vehicles can increase vehicle throughput, 
but under most  circumstances their congestion impacts are likely to be mixed. They are likely to 
reduce crashes caused by human error, but will introduce new risks including hardwa re and 
software failures, malicious hacking, increased risk -taking if other road users feel safer, and the 
additional exposure caused by induced vehicle travel. Electric autonomous vehicles should 
reduce  but not eliminate  pollution emissions compared with fossil fueled vehicles . These 
benefits may be partly offset if autonomous driving  increase s total vehicle travel.  
3. Horizontal equity with respect to road space  
Road space is a scarce and valuable resource. Horizontal equity requires giving priority to spac e-
efficient vehicles, such as vanpools and buses, so their passengers are not delayed by congestion 
caused by users of space -intensive modes , such as single -occupant automobiles.  
 
Private autonomous vehicles are likely to have low occupancy rates. As previ ously described, 
without efficient road pricing it will often be cheaper for motorists to program their autonomous 
cars to circle the block or return home, to avoid paying for off -street parking, which will 
contribute even more to traffic congestion. To ma ximize equity, public roads should be managed 
and priced to favor space -efficient modes, including shared autonomous taxis and microtransit, 
and to limit traffic volumes to roadway capacity. This will be increasingly important as 
autonomous vehicles become  more common, which will increase potential travel demands . 
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
17 
 4. Vertical equity with respect to abilities and needs 
This assumes that transportation policies should favor people with special needs, such as 
people with disabilities or impairments, families wit h children, travellers carrying baggage, or 
non-drivers located in automobile -dependent areas.  
 
Autonomous vehicles can provide more independent  mobility for people with some disabilities , 
such as visual impairments , and because of their lower costs, a utonomous taxis can provide an 
affordable option for non -drivers  for some trips .  
5. Vertica l equity with respect to income – affordability  
This perspective  assumes that public policies should favor poorer over wealthier people, and 
increase affordable transport ation options, particularly to access essential services and 
activities (healthcare, basic services, education, jobs, etc.).  
 
For the next two or three decades  autonomous driving capability is predicted to  increase 
annual costs by a few thousand dollars , to approximately $10,000 per vehicle -year , to pay for 
additional hardware and software, maintenance, and mapping subscriptions . Autonomous taxis 
will probably cost $0.50 to $1.00 per mile, which is cheaper than human -powered taxies but 
more expensive than a personal human -operated  automobile. This suggests that  personal 
autonomous vehicles will not be affordable  to lower -income households , and policies that favor 
their use, such as dedicated lanes, will be regressive. Autonomous taxi services can increase 
affordability compared with owning a personal vehicle for people who drive  relatively low 
annual miles . Affordable transportation is usually defined as costing less than 15% of a 
household’s total expenditure budget, so a $40,000 annual expenditure househol d (second 
income quintile) can afford to spend up to $6,000 per year on transportation, which can only 
pay for about 5,000 annual  autonomous taxi -miles each for two adults.  
 
This implies that most low - and moderate -income households can only can only bene fit from  
autonomous vehicles  as part of a multimodal lifestyle ; autonomous vehicles will not help them 
afford the high -annual -miles generally required for living in sprawled locations .  
 
In summary, autonomous  vehicles are likely to  support some equity goals but contradict others. 
Autonomous vehicles can provide independent mobility for some disadvantaged groups, such 
as people with visual impairments, and can reduce taxi and public transit operating costs, which 
increases affordabil ity for people who drive less than about 5,000 annual miles.  Private 
autonomous vehicles will be costly, so subsidies for their use tend to be unfair and regressive. 
They can reduce affordability and fairness, and harm non -drivers overall, if they induce 
additional vehicle travel and sprawl, which increases external costs (congestion, infrastructure 
costs, crash risk and pollution emissions imposed on other people) , or if they increase 
automobile dependency and sprawl, which reduces affordable transport opt ions. 
 
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
18 
 Benefit and Cost  Summary  
The table below compares costs and benefits of  various  vehicle types.  
 
Exhibit 8 Costs Compared  
 Private  Human -
driven Vehicle  Private  Autonomous 
Vehicle  Shared Autonomous 
Vehicle  Shared 
Autonomous Ride  
Financial cost s Low fixed costs 
(particularly used cars), 
moderate variable.  High fixed costs, low 
variable costs.  Minimal  fixed costs, 
moderate variable 
costs.  Minimum fixed costs, 
low variable costs.  
Convenience  High. A private  vehicle 
is available any time.  High. A private  vehicle 
is available any time. 
Provides vehicle travel 
to non -drivers.  Moderate. Vehicles will 
often require several 
minutes to arrive. 
Provides door -to-door 
service.  Moderate. Collecting 
passengers will often 
take several minutes. 
Does not provide  
door -to-door service.  
Comfort  Low to moderate, 
depending on driving 
conditions.  High. Users have their 
own vehicles with 
chosen amenities.  Moderate. Shared, 
vehicles may be 
abused.  Lowest. Traveler s 
share vehicles  with 
strangers . 
External costs 
(congestion, 
facilities , crash es 
and pollution)  Moderate to high.  High. Likely to increase 
total vehicle travel 
which will increase 
external costs.  Moderate. May 
increase total vehicle 
travel in some 
circumstances and 
reduce it in others.  Lowest. Can reduce 
total vehicle travel 
and associated costs  
Social equity 
impacts  Moderate to high. 
Inequitable.  Moderate to high. 
Least equitable.  Moderate to low. 
Mixed equity impacts.  Lowest. Most 
equitable.  
Most 
appropriate uses  Moderate - and low-
income suburban and 
rural residents.  Affluent suburban and 
rural residents  Suburban and urban 
traveler s. Urban traveler s. 
Vehicle types vary in their costs, convenience and comfort, and therefore their impacts on total vehicle travel.  
 
 
Fulton, Compostella and Kothawala (2020)  perform similar analysis of the monetary and non -
monetary factors that affect travel decisions including travel time, stress, convenience, 
reliability, and preferences regarding driving and sharing vehicles.  
 
Of course, th ese impacts will depend on specific vehicle features. Larger, higher -speed vehicles 
tend to be more costly than smaller, lower -speed vehicles, and electric vehicles have lower 
operating costs than fossil fuel vehicles. Financial costs are likely to be much  higher during the 
first decade or two that autonomous vehicles are commercially available, and should decline as 
this technology becomes available in lower -priced models, and eventually in used vehicles.  
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
19 
 Exhibit 9 summarizes autonomous vehicle benefits and costs, categorized according to whether 
they are internal (affect users) or external (affect other people). T otal impacts will depend on 
how they  affect  total  vehicle travel: if they stimulate more driving, exter nal costs are likely to 
increase , but if they help reduce total vehicle travel , total costs  should decline.  
 
Exhibit 9  Autonomous Vehicle Potential Benefits and Costs   Benefits  Costs/Problems  Internal (user Impacts ) 
Reduced  drivers’  stress  and increased 
productivity . Motorists  can rest, play and work 
while travelling .  
Mobility for non -drivers.  More  independent 
mobility for non -drivers  can reduce motorists ’ 
chauffeur ing burdens and  transit  subsidy needs .  
Reduced paid driver costs.  Reduce s costs for taxis 
services and commercial transport  drivers . Increase d vehicle  costs.  Requires additional vehicle 
equipment,  services and fees . 
Additional  user  risks.  Additional crashes caused by  system 
failures, platooning, higher tra ffic speeds, additiona l risk -
taking , and increased  total vehicle travel . 
Reduced s ecurity and privacy.  May be vulnerable to 
information abuse (ha cking), and features such as location  
tracking and data sharing may r educe privacy . External (Impacts on others)  Increased safety.  May r educe crash  risks and 
insurance costs. May reduce high -risk driving .  
Increased road capacity  and cost  savings . More 
efficient vehicle traffic may  reduce  congestion 
and roadway costs.  
Reduced parking costs.  Reduces demand for 
parking at destinations . 
Reduced energy consumption and pollution . May 
increase fuel efficiency and reduce emissions.  
Supports vehicle  sharing . Could facilitate 
carsharing  and ridesharing, reduc ing total vehicle 
ownership and travel, and associated costs . Increased infrastructure  costs. May require higher roadway 
design and maintenance standards.  
Additional risk s. May increase risks to other  road users  and 
may be used for criminal activities.  
Increased traffic problems . Increased vehicle travel may 
increase congestion, pollution and sprawl -related costs . 
Social equity concerns.  May reduce affordable mobility 
options  including  walking, bicycling and transit services . 
Reduced employment . Jobs for drivers may decline.  
Reduced support for other solutions . Optimistic predictions 
of autonomous driving  may discourage other transport 
improvements and management strategies.  
Autonomo us vehicles can provide various benefits and costs , including  external impacts on other people.  
 
 
Some benefits, such as  reduced driver stress  and increased productivity , can occur with Level 4 
automation (able to operate autonomously under certain conditions, such as grade -separated 
highways during clear weather), but most benefits  require Level 5 automation (able to operate 
autonomously under all normal conditions), which allows vehicles to transport non -drivers and 
drive empty . 
 
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
20 
 Travel Impacts  
A key factor in this analysis is how autonomous vehicles  will affect total vehicle travel  (Circella  
and Hardman 2022; Miller and Kang 2019 ; Nunes et a l. 2021;  Rodier 2018 ). Exhibit 10  
summarizes p otential  impacts .  
 
Exhibit 10 Potential  Autonomous Vehicle Travel Impacts   
Increases Vehicle Travel  Reduces Vehicle Travel  
Increased vehicle travel by non -drivers.  
Empty vehicle travel to drop off and pick up passengers , 
deliver goods , and travelling to  maintenance stations . 
Reduce d vehicle operating costs  (due to electrification)  
increases vehicle travel . 
Increased passenger convenience and productivity 
encourages people to travel more.  
Over  the long run e ncourages more sprawled development 
and reduced public transit service.  More convenient shared vehicle services allow 
households to reduce vehicle ownership, which 
leverages vehicle travel reductions . 
Self-driving buses , and better last -mile access,  improv e 
transit services.  
Reduced traffic risk and parking facilities mak e urban 
living more attractive.  
Autonomous  vehicles can affect total vehicle travel in various ways.  
 
 
Autonomous vehicles  are likely to significantly increase non-drivers ’ vehicle travel . By increasing 
passenger comfort and productivity, autonomous operation  can make long -distance trips, 
including  commutes, more endurable, increasing  vehicle travel  and spraw l. Electric vehicles cost 
about half as much to operate as comparable fossil -fuel v ehicles.  Because they cost more to 
own but less to drive than current automobiles, they give vehicle owners even more incentive 
to maximize their annual vehicle travel, in order to get their money’s worth from these large 
fixed investments.  This is likely to increase annual  vehicle mileage , particularly  by suburban and 
rural autonomous vehicle owners  (Nunes et al. 2021) . One study found that  drivers who used 
Tesla semi -autonomous Autopilot  technology  drove nearly 5,000 more annual miles than those 
who didn’t  because, they  said, the increased comfort and reduced stress made them  more 
willing to sit in traffic and take  more long -distance trips (Circella  and Hardman (2022) , and  
families  given free chauffeuring service s increased their vehicle travel by 80% , with large  
increase s in longer distance  and zero -occupancy travel (Harb, et al. 2018) . 
 
On the other hand, b y providing more affordable  taxi and public transit services,  by reducing 
total vehicle travel, improving walking and bicycling conditions , and  reducing parking needs,  
shared autonomous vehicles may encourage urban living and vehicle sharing  (Lovejoy, Handy 
and Boarnet 2013) . As a result, total travel impacts depend on the portion of  households that  
choose urban rather than suburban or rural locatio ns, and the portion that  share  rather than 
own autonomous vehicles .  
 
Optimists  predict that shared autonomous taxis will soon  displace most p rivate  vehicle s (ITF 
2014 ; Keeney 2017 ). For example, Kok, et al (2017), predict ed that, “By 2030, within 10 years of 
regulatory approval of fully autonomous vehicles, 95% of all U.S. passenger miles will be served 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
21 
 by transport -as-a-service (TaaS) providers who will own and operate fleets of autonomous 
electric vehicles providing passengers wi th higher levels of service, faster rides and vastly 
increased safety at a cost up to 10 times cheaper than today’s individually owned (IO) vehicles.”  
 
However, m any travelers have good  reasons  to own rather than share  vehicles:  
 Convenience . Motorists ofte n keep items in their vehicles, including car seats, tools, sports 
equipment and emergency supplies.  
 Speed and Reliability . Under optimal conditions , taxis  and ridehail vehicles  arrive a few  minutes 
of being summon ed, but can take much longer, particularl y during busy periods, for special 
vehicle types (to carry multiple passengers or a wheelchair), and in suburban and rural areas.  
 Costs. Vehicle sharing is generally cost effective for motorists who drive less than about 6,000 
annual miles. People who liv e in suburban and rural areas, who usually commute by car, or who 
for other reasons drive high annual miles will probably choose to own a private vehicle.  
 Status.  Many people take pride in their vehicles and driving ability, and so may prefer to own 
private vehicles that are capable of human operation .  
 
 
Shared rides have lowe r costs but less convenience and comfort, since trips take longer to 
collect passengers, generally cannot offer door -to-door service, and passengers must travel in 
confined spaces with strangers. Vehicle dispatching adds delays and uncertainty,  particularly in 
suburban and rural areas , where an autonomous taxi  pickup  may take 10 -20 minutes . Vehicle 
sharing generates deadheading  (zero -passenger vehicle travel) for example, when loading  
passengers. More than 40% of current ridehail ing vehicle travel is  deadheading  (Henao and 
Marshall 2018) . If sharing services become common  in an area , deadheading may decline but 
cannot disappear, particularly in suburban  and rural areas where destinations  are dispersed.  
 
Exhibit 11 compares the travelers and trips most suited to various vehicles.  
 
Exhibit 1 1 Most Suitable Traveler s and Trips  
Human -Drive n Private  Autonomous  Shared Autonomous  
Moderate - and lower -income 
drivers, who purchased older, used 
vehicles.  
Motorists who prefer driving their 
vehicles for enjoyment or perceived 
safety sake.  
Traveler s who place a high value on 
privacy.  Traveler s who place a high value on 
comfort or status . 
Motorists who drive more than 
6,000 annual miles.  
Motorists who often carry  
equipment, tools, or special 
accessories in their vehicles . Trips currently made by taxi or 
carshare vehicles.  
Utilitarian trips currently made by a 
private vehicle drive n less than 6,000 
annual miles.  
Urban residents.  
People who want to save money 
more than time.  
Some traveler s are most suitable for private  vehicles, other for shared vehicles.  
 
 
One way to predict autonomous vehicle  travel impacts is to consider how they  affect 
generalized costs , which include travel time  and vehicle operating costs . As these costs decline, 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
22 
 people  tend to travel  more . Drivers typically  value their time at 20 -40% of wage rates  (e.g., a 
$20/hr. automob ile worker would pay $1 -2 to save ten  minutes) , or about 20 ₵ per mile.  
Autonomous vehicles probably reduce  drivers’  travel time costs by about half.  Vehicle and ride  
sharing introduce delays and inconvenience compared  with owning a personal vehicle . 
 
Taxi and ridehailing typically cost about $2.00 per mile, current gasoline cars about 20₵ per 
mile, and electric cars about 5₵ per vehicle -mile, considering just short -term vehicle operating 
costs (fuel and tire wear).  
 
Exhibit 12 compares these costs on a tra vel demand curve , which illustrates how prices affect  
vehicle  travel. Taxi and rideshare travel are relatively costly, so people who rely on these modes 
tend to generate relatively few vehicle -miles . Carsharing, autonomous taxis and autonomous 
rides are ch eaper than taxis but more expensive and less convenient than private automobiles, 
resulting in moderate annual vehicle travel by people who rely on them.  Conventional , fossil 
fuel automobile  owners  typically drive about 10,000 annual miles , and e lectric ca r owners are 
likely to drive somewhat more  due to their low fuel costs. Electric autonomous vehicle owners 
are likely to increase automobile travel due to their low fuel and travel time costs.  
 
Exhibit 1 2 Generalized Cost (Money and Time) Travel Demand Curve  
 As generalized costs 
decline vehicle travel 
increases. Currently, 
motorists typically drive 
about 10,000 annual 
miles. Autonomous taxis 
users are likely to travel 
less due to higher 
financial costs and 
reduced convenience, 
private autonomous 
vehicl e owners are likely 
to travel more due to 
lower operating and 
increased convenience.  
 
 
Of course, these costs  and consumer responses  are difficult to predict and will depend on other 
factors, including  quality of mobility services available, land use development conditions, and 
individual preferences. However, it is safe to predict that people who rely on shared 
autonomous vehicles will on average travel less, and those who  own personal electric 
autonom ous vehicle will travel more, than they would with conventional, fossil fuel, human -
operated vehicles.  Public policies can affect the amount of travel generated by these modes by 
affecting their financial and travel time costs, for example, through fuel an d road user fees, and 
roadway management strategies that make shared vehicles more convenient and faster to use.  
 $0.00$0.50$1.00$1.50$2.00
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 14,000 16,000 18,000 20000Generalized Cost Per Vehicle -Mile  
Annual Vehicle Miles Per Traveler  Taxi/Ridehailing ($2.00)
Carshare ($0.80)
Autonomous Taxi ($0.60)
Shared Autonomous Ride ($0.50)
Current Car ($0.40)
Electric Car ($0.30)
Autonomous Electric Car ($0.15)
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
23 
 Some recent studies have investigated  autonomous vehicle  travel impacts. A survey of 1,000 
U.S. adults  found that many do not expect autonomou s vehicles to significantly affect their 
travel,  but those who do are far more likely to predict vehicle travel  increase s than decline s 
(Fleming and Singer 2019) . Sivak and Schoettle (2015 b) estimate that accommodating non -
drivers’ latent travel demands co uld increase total vehicle travel up to 11%. Trommer, et al. 
(2016) predict that autonomous vehicles will increase total vehicle travel 3 -9% by 2035. 
Taiebat, Stolper and Xu (2019) predict that autonomous vehicles will increase  average 
household ’s vehicle travel by 2–47% , with the largest increases by  higher income groups.   
 
The table below summarizes these impacts.  
 
Exhibit 1 3 Autonomous Vehicle Impacts on Various  Travel Demands  
Travel Type  Autonomous Vehicle Impacts  Portion of Travel  
Freight trucks  Particularly suitable for long -haul fright travel, due to its high labor 
costs and limited routes, mostly on grade -separated highways.  10%  
Small commercial 
(trades and deliveries)  Trades (plumbers, computer technicians, etc.) carry equipment in 
their vehicles , so they are likely to own autonomou s vehicles . Delivery 
companies can use autonomous vehicles to reduce costs. This may 
increase total vehicle travel.  5% 
Public transport  Particularly suit able for public transit , due to its high labor costs. 
Allows micro -transit with  frequent  and demand -response  service s.  Currently 2%, but 
could increase.  
Longer -distance (> 50 
mile) personal trips  Particularly suitable for longer -distance personal trips, due to tedium. 
May increase longer -distance travel.  Currently 20%, but 
could increase.  
Local suburban and 
rural  Affluent suburban and rural residents are likely to purchase private 
autonomous vehicles  and increase  total vehicle travel. Lower -income 
residents are likely to continue driving private  vehicle s or use shared 
autonomous vehicles,  which could  reduce their total vehicle travel.  50%  
Local urban trips  Many  are likely to shift from private  cars to shar ed autonomous 
mobility services, which is likely to reduce their total vehicle travel.  20%  
Non -drivers  Non-drivers  are likely to increase their vehicle travel.  2-4% but increasing . 
Autonomous vehicle travel impacts will vary by types of trips.  
 
 
The following scenarios illustrate how autonomous vehicles would impact various users’ travel:  
Jake  is affluent and vision  impaired . He purchases an autonomous vehicle  as soon as they become 
available . Impacts:  Autonomous vehicle s allow Jake to maintain  independent mobility which 
increases his vehicle travel.  
Bonnie lives and works in a suburb. She can bike to most destinations but owns  a car for occasional 
trips . When  autonomous  taxi service s become available she gives up her private vehicle . Impacts:  
Autonomous vehicles allow Bonnie to avoid vehicle  ownership and  reduce vehicle travel.  
Melisa  and Johnn y are shopping for a new home . Autonomous vehicles let them consider more 
distant ho uses because Melisa can  rest and work  while commuting .  Impacts:  Autonomous vehicles 
allow Melisa and Johnny to choose an exurban home which increased their total vehicle t ravel.  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
24 
 Garry  is a responsible  driver  when sober but dangerous when drunk. Affordable autonomous 
vehicles allow him to avoid this risk . Impacts:  Affordable used autonomous vehicles allow Garry to 
avoid impaired driving, accidents and revoked driving privileges, which reduces crash risks but 
increases his vehicle ownership and travel . 
 
Exhibit 14  summarizes the impacts of these various scenarios. In most of these scenarios 
autonomous vehicles increase total vehicle travel  
 
Exhibit 1 4 Autonomous  Vehicle  Scenario Summary  
 User Benefits  Travel Impacts  External Costs  
Jake  (affluent and 
visually impaired)  Independent mobility for 
non-drivers  Increased vehicle travel and 
external costs  Increased residential 
parking and roadway costs  
Bonnie  (multi -
modal traveler)  Vehicle cost savings  Reduced vehicle ownership 
and travel  Reduced residential parking 
and roadway costs  
Melisa and Johnny  
(suburban family)  Better  home location 
options  Increased vehicle ownership 
and travel  Increased residential 
parking and roa dway costs  
Garry  (high -risk 
driver)  Avoids driving d runk and 
associated risks  Less high -risk driving, more 
total vehicle travel  Increased residential 
parking and roadway costs  
Autonomous vehicle availability can have various direct and indirect impacts.  
 
 
This suggests that with current policies, autonomous vehicles are likely to increase total vehicle 
travel by 10 -30%, and possibly more, increasing traffic congestion and roadway infrastructure 
costs, and possibly crash risk and pollution emissions, depen ding on the type of travel that 
increases. Public policies will affect these impacts (Miller and Kang 2019). If policies make 
private autonomous vehicles affordable and attractive, for example, because electric vehicles 
pay minimal road user fees and auton omous vehicles have dedicated lanes, total vehicle travel 
is likely to increase. If they are charged efficient road user fees and roads have high occupancy 
vehicle lanes, shared rides will become more attractive, reducing total vehicle travel.  
 
This additional vehicle travel tends to provide small marginal benefits, since it consists of travel 
that users most willingly forego if their costs increase. To value such benefits economists use 
the rule of half , which states that the benefits of additio nal travel are worth half the total per -
trip saving (Litman 2009, “Evaluating Transportation Benefits”; World Bank 2005). For example, 
if a 10¢ per mile cost reduction caused a motorists to travel 1,000 additional vehicle -miles, the 
net benefit can be valu ed as $50, calculated at (10₵ x 1,000)/2 = $50). Since vehicle travel 
imposes significant external costs, including congestion, infrastructure costs, and possibly 
crashes and pollution emissions, much of the additional vehicle travel is likely to be 
econom ically inefficient; its incremental benefits are less than its incremental costs.  
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
25 
 Development  and Deploymen t Predictions  
New technologies generally follow an S -curve development pattern, as illustrated in Exhibit 15. 
An initial concept usually experiences development, testing, approval, commercial release, 
product improvement, market expansion, differentiation, maturation, and eventually 
saturation and decline. Autonomous vehicle technology will probably follow this pattern.  
 
Exhibit 15 Innovation S -Curve  
 
Most innovations follow a predictable deployment pattern, often called in innovation S -curve.   
 
 
Autonomous vehicle s are currently in development and testing stages. Many current vehicles 
have Level 2  and 3 technologies such as cruise control, hazard warn ing and automated parallel 
parking. Tesla’s Autopilot  offers automated steering and acceleration in limited conditions, 
although deployment was delayed after it caused a fatal crash in 2016  (Hawkins 2017). Several 
companies have Level 4 pilot projects, whi ch are testing autonomous vehic les in certain  
conditions  (CPUC 2020) , but d espite this progress, many technical improvements are needed 
before vehicles can operate autonomously  under all normal conditions (Simonite 2016).  
 
Autonomous vehicle technologies w ill need to  go through several more stages to become  
widely  commercially available, reliable and affordable, and therefore common in the vehicle 
fleet. Because vehicles can impose significant external costs, such as congestion  and crash risks,  
they have higher testing and regulation standards than most other technological innovations 
such as personal computers and mobile phones. Under optimistic conditions testing and 
approval will only require a few years, but  if the technology proves to be  unreliable and 
dange rous, for example, if autonomous vehicles cause  high -profile crashes, it may take longer  
(Bhuiyan 2017). It is likely that different jurisdictions will impose different testing, approval and 
regulations, resulting in varying rates of depl oyment.  
 0%20%40%60%80%100%Potential Market  
Commercial release  
Development  Product 
improvement  Expansion  Maturation  Saturation  
Concept  Testing  and approval  Market diffusion  Decline  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
26 
 In 2015, autonomous vehicle expert Chris Urmson famously predicted that his son would never 
need a driver’s license because self -driving would be ubiquitous by the time he reached driving 
age in 2019, but in a 2019 interview he predicted a much mo re modest, “hundreds or maybe 
thousands of self -driving vehicles on the road within five years” (The Economist 2019). 
Although current technologies allow vehicle s to operate  autonomously on grade -separated 
highways , in good weather , achieving 95% operabili ty (vehicles are unable to reach desired 
destination a few times each month ) will be difficult  (Leonard, Mindell and Stayton 2020) . 
Achieving  99.9% operability  (vehicles are unable to reach desired destination s only about once 
a year) will be  far more diff icult  still (Wharton 2017).  
 
Operating a vehicle on public roads is complex due to the frequency of interactions with often -
unpredictable objects including potholes, vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists  and animals. As a result , 
autonomous vehicles require orde rs of magnitude more complex software then aircraft ( Exhibit 
16). Producing such software is challenging and costly, and it is sure to have errors . There will 
almost certainly be system failures,  some  caus ing severe  accidents.  
 
Exhibit 16 Aircraft and Automobile Software Code Compared (GAO 2016 ) 
 Vehicles need  more 
complex computer 
systems than aircraft, 
due to the complex ity 
of roadway 
interactions.  
 
 
Consider one challenge. For safety sake motorists are  advised to drive defensively , which means 
anticipating potential risks , such  as wild animals and playful children . To do this, autonomous 
vehicles will need a database that categorizes, for example, fire hydrants as low -risk, pets on 
leashes as medium risk, and wild animals , such as kangaroos , as high risk . In addition, children 
sometimes dress in animal costumes , and adolescents in zombie variations . Most drivers can 
understand  such risks. I f I warn , “Watch out for  teenagers  dressed  in zombie kangaroo 
costumes, ” you could probably unde rstand the threat since you too were once a playful  youth, 
but a  computer would be flummoxed: such an unusual  situation is unlikely  be in its database so 
the vehicle would either miss -categorize the risk , perhaps treating costumed fun -seekers as 
injured crash victims  or a riotous mob, or stop  and wait for human instructions. These systems 
can self -learn , and so could understand such  behaviors  and costumes if they become common , 
but cannot anticipate new conditions, and each new set of instructions will further increase 
system complexity and therefore potential risks and delays . 
 
In addition to technological progress, market deployment depends on consumer demand: 
traveler s’ willingness to pay for autonomous mobility. Surveys indicate significant consumer 
conc erns ( Schoettle and Sivak  2014) . Traveler s will face access anxiety  if their vehicle cannot 
reach all desired destinations (Grush 2017).  
 

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
27 
 Although optimists predict that most vehicles will operate autonomously by 2030  (Johnston 
and Walker 2017; Keeney 2017; Kok, et al. 2017) , most  of them have  financial interests in 
autonomous vehicle industries , and base their predictions on  experience with electronic 
technologies such as digital camera, smart phones and personal computers rather than motor 
vehicle inn ovations . For example, the widely -cited report, “ Rethinking Transportation 2020 -
2030 ” was written by ReThink, “an independent think tank that analyzes and forecasts the 
speed and scale of technology -driven disruption and its implications across society.” Mobility -
As-A-Service: Why Self -Driving Cars Could Change Everything , was published by ARK Investment 
Management , and written by an analyst who has little apparent experience with transportation 
innovation. Automotive Revolution – Perspective Towards 2030: How the Convergence of 
Disruptive Technology -Driven Trends Could Transform the Auto Industry , was published by the 
McKinsey  business management firm. Although their predictions are often qualified – 
autonomous vehicles “could” or “might” change everything – their conclusions are often 
presented with unjustified certitude.  
 
Such reports are primarily oriented toward investors , and so focus on the autonomous vehicle 
sales potential ; policy makers and planners are interested in their fleet penetration and tra vel 
impacts. Motor vehicles are durable and expensive; consumers seldom purchase new vehicles 
simply to obtain a new technology, so innovations generally take decades to fully penetrate 
vehicle markets. Optimists argue that benefits will be large enough to  justify premature 
scrapping  of vehicle s that lack autonomous driving capability, but that seems unlikely under 
realistic assumptions of their benefits and costs.  
 
Most objective experts acknowledge that  Level 5 automation  will require many more years for 
development  and testing  (Mervis  2017 ). For example, Michigan Mobi lity Transformation Center 
director Huei Peng said that, “ it may be decades before a vehicle can drive itself safely at any 
speed on any road in any weather ” (Truett 2016). Similarly, Toyota Research  Institute CEO, Gill 
Pratt stated that autonomous driving, “ is a wonderful goal but none of us in the automobile or 
IT industries are close to a chieving true Level 5 autonomy” (Ackerman 2017). Uber self -driving 
vehicle lab director Raquel Urtasun said that, “Having self -driving cars at a smaller scale, on a 
small set of roads, we are fairly close  …Nobody has a solution to self -driving cars that is reliable 
and safe enough to work every where ” (Marowits 2017).   
 
Artificial intelligence  expert  Yoshua B engio said that, "I think people underestimate how much 
basic science still needs to be done before these cars or such systems will be able to anticipate 
the kinds of unusual, dangerous situations that can happen on the road" (Marowits 2017).  Chris 
Urmson,  CEO of Aurora , a leading autonomous vehicle development firm, in 2015 hoped that 
self-driving cars would eliminate the need for his son to obtain a  driver’s license when he 
became eligible in  2019, but that year admitted that only “ hundreds or maybe thous ands of 
self-driving vehicles ” will operate on  public  road  by 2024 . 
 
The following section uses experience with previous vehicle technologies to provide realistic 
predictions of autonomous vehicle development and deployment.  
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
28 
 Experience with Previous Vehicle Technology Deployment  
Previous vehicle technologies can help  predict autonomous vehicle deployment . 
 
Mass automobile production began in 1908  with the Ford Model T . By the 1920s, cities 
experienced traffic and parking congestion, and by the 1930s vehicles outnumbered  
households , but the transport system remained  mixed, with most people  relying on  walking, 
bicycling and public transit in addition to their cars. Only after the 19 60s did  most  adults  have a 
private  vehicle , and only after the 1980s did the market approach saturation .   
 
Exhibit 17 U.S. Population and Automobile Ownership (FHWA 2016)  
  
Although mass automobile 
production started in 1908  with 
the Ford Model T , it took 
decades for automobiles to 
become the dominant travel 
modes . Only in the 19 60s did 
most  potential drivers own a 
private  vehicle, and only after 
1980 did ownership approach 
saturation.  
 
 
Below are other examples of vehicle technology development and deployment.  
 Automatic Transmissions  (Healey 2012) . First  developed in the 1930s , it took until the 1980s  for 
them  to become reliable and affordable. W hen optional , they typically cost  $1,000 to $2,000. 
They are included in  90%  of new vehicle in North America , and 50% in Europe and Asia .   
 Air Bags  (Dirksen 1997) .  First  introduced in 1973. Initially an expensive and sometimes 
dangerous option (they cause d injuries and deaths), they became cheaper and safer , became  
standard on some  models starting  in 1988, and  mandated by U.S. federal regulation in 1998.  
 Hybrid Vehicles  (Berman 2011) . These b ecame commercially available  in 1997  but were initially 
unreliable and expensive . Their performance has improved,  but typically adds  about $5,000 to 
vehicle prices . In 201 6 they represented about  2% of total vehicle sales.  
 Remote lock/unlock, diagnostics , emergency response  and navigation  services.  OnStar became 
available in 1997, TomTom in 2002 . Such services typically cost $150 -750 annually .  
 Vehicle  Navigation Systems  (Lendin o 2012) . Vehicle  navigation systems  became  available as 
expensive accessories in the mid -1980s. In the mid -1990 s factory -installed systems became  
available on some models for about $2,000. Performance and usability have  since  improved, and 
prices have declined to about $500 for factory -installed systems, and under $200 for portable 
systems. They are standard in many higher -priced models.  Vehicle navigation apps, such as 
Google Maps and Waze, are available for free or a m odest fee.  00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010Motor Vehicles Per Capita  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
29 
  Electric vehicles  (“History of Electric Vehicles” Wikipedia). Battery -electric cars developed in the 
late 1800s , but were  uncommon during most of the Twentie th Century. In the 1990s, major 
manufacture s produced improved models , such as General M otor’s EV1,  and by 2020 many  
companies sold high quality electric cars . Despite this progress, only about 1% of total vehicle 
sales are electric  and h igh-performance models  are expensive.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 8 summarizes their  deployment. All of these technologies required decades from initial 
commercial availability to market saturation, and some have never became universal.  
 
Exhibit 1 8 Vehicle Technology Deployment Summary  
Technology  Deployment Cycle  Typical Cost Premium  Market Saturation Share  
Automatic transmissions  50 years (1940s -90s)  $1,500  90% U.S., 50% worldwide  
Air bags  25 years (1973 -98) A few hundred dollars  100%, due to federal mandate  
Hybrid vehicles  25+ years (1990s -2015+)  $5,000  Uncertain. Currently about 4%.  
Subscription services  15 years  $400  annual  5-10% 
Navigation systems  30+ years (1985 -2015+)  $500 and rapidly declining  Uncertain; probably over 80%.  
Electric vehicles  100+ years  $10,000 for high -performance  Probably 80%+  
New technologies usually require several decades between commercial availability to market saturation.  
 
 
Because autonomous vehicle technologies are more complex and costly than these 
technologies, their market acceptance and penetration are likely to  take longer ( Lavasani  and 
Jin 2016). New vehicles are becomin g more durable, which reduces fleet turnover. As a result, 
new vehicle technologies normally require three to five decades to penetrate 90% of vehicle 
fleets. Deployment may be faster in developing countries where fleets are expanding, and in 
areas with st rict vehicle inspection requirements, such as Japan’s shaken  system. Annual 
mileage tends to decline with vehicle age: vehicles average approximately 15,000 miles their 
first year, 10,000 miles their 10th year, and 5,000 miles their 15th year, so vehicles over ten years 
represent about 50% of vehicle fleets but only 20% of mileage (ORNL 2012, Table 3.8).  
 
Deployment Predictions  
Exhibit 1 9 uses the previous analysis to  predict autonomous  vehicle  sales, fleet and travel  
market penetration , assum ing that Level 5 vehicles become commercially available in the  late 
2020s but are initially  expensive  and have limited performance . During their first decade only a 
minority of new vehicles are likely to be fully autonomous, with market shares increa sing as 
their performance improves, prices decline, and consumers gain confidence. By 2045 as much 
as half of new vehicle  sales  could be autonomous , but w ithout mandates, market saturation  
will probably take several decades,  and some  motorists  may  continue to choose human 
operated vehicles due to costs and preferences.  These results are approximately consistent 
with other researchers ’ estimates  (Grush 2016; Lavasani  and Jin 2016; Simonite 2016), although 
slower than optimistic predictions by some i ndustry experts  (Kok, et al. 2017; McKinsey  2016 ).  
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
30 
 Exhibit 1 9 Autonomous  Vehicle Market Penetration  Projections   
Stage  Decade  New Sales  Fleet  Travel  
Development and testing  2020s  0% 0% 0% 
Available with large price premium  2030s 2-5% 1-2% 1-4% 
Available with moderate price premium  2040s 20-40%  10-20%  10-30%  
Available with minimal price premium  2050s 40-60%  20-40%  30-50%  
Standard feature included on most new vehicles  2060s 80-100%  40-60%  50-80%  
Saturation (everybody who wants it has it)  2070s ? ? ? 
Required for all new and operating vehicles  ? 100%  100%  100%  
Autonomous vehicle will probably take several decades  to penetrate new vehicle sales, fleets and travel . 
 
 
Exhibit 20  illustrates these deployment rates , including higher and lower estimates .  
 
Exhibit 20  Autonomous Vehicle Sales, Fleet and Travel Projections (Based on Exhibit 13 ) 
  
If autonomous vehicles follow previous  vehicle technologies , it will take one to three decades for them to 
dominate new vehicle sales,  and one or two more decades to dominate vehicle travel, and even at 
saturation a  portion of vehicle travel may  continue to be human operated , indicated by dashed lines.  
 
 
Because  of their high labor costs,  commercial vehicles  are likely to be automated  most q uickly , 
particularly for long -haul travel  on limited access highways . However,  commercial  drivers  
provide various services, including  passenger assistance  and security , monitoring and 
maintenance  and loading , so some vehicle operator  jobs will change but  not disappear .  
 
Signific antly faster implementation would  require more rapid  development, deployment and 
fleet turnover than  previous vehicle technologies. For example, for most  vehicl e travel to be 
autonomous by 204 5, almost all  vehicles produced  after 2035 would need to be autonomous, 
new vehicle purchase rates  and spending  would need to increase significantly  so fleet turnover 
that normally takes three decades can occur in one , and many otherwise functional vehicles 
would be scrapped simply because the y lack self -driving capability.  Sales  
Travel  
Fleet  
0%20%40%60%80%100%
2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080Sales - Higher
          - Lower
Travel - Higher
           -  Lower
Fleet - Higher
Fleet -  Lower
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
31 
  
Shared  mobility  services , such as  carsharing and ridehail ing, are already  reducing vehicle 
ownership and parking demand in some situations ( DeLuca  2018) . Autonomous vehicle  could 
accelerate these trends , but as previously described, outside dense urban areas  they  are 
inconvenient and inefficient, and so are unlikely to replace the majority of  private vehicle travel 
in sub urban and rural areas where most  Americans  currently  live. 
 
The following factors affect the  speed of autonomous vehicle deployment:  
 The speed of technological development. Level 4 technologies (vehicles able to operate 
autonomously in limited conditions) are currently available, but significant technological 
progress is needed before vehicles ca n operate autonomously under all normal conditions. 
Reliable Level 5 operation may be available in five years or may require another 25 years.  
 Testing and r egulatory approval . Testing and approval standards are currently under 
development, but several more  years may be required for these standards to be adopt ed in 
most jurisdictions, and additional time will be required for large -scale testing.  
 Incremental costs . Autonomous vehicles require additional equipment and services which add 
costs. For the foreseea ble future (one to three decades) autonomous operation will only be 
available in relatively expensive new vehicles, adding thousands of dollars in annual expenses 
compared with human -operated vehicles. High incremental costs will reduce the portion of new 
vehicles that have this technology, reducing the speed of fleet penetration.  
 Consumer travel and housing preferences  and development practices . Currently, most North 
American households live in automobile -dependent communities and own p rivate  vehicles. 
Autonomous vehicle sharing is most appropriate for households that live in more multi -modal 
communities where they travel less than about 6,000 annual miles by automobile. As a res ult, 
shared autonomous vehicle travel will become more common if many households are able to 
move into multi -modal communities. Consumer acceptance may be reduced by  safety  fears, 
privacy concerns, or preferences, resulting in a significant portion of vehicle travel remaining 
human -driven even after market saturation  
 Service quality  and affordability . If autonomous  taxis are convenient , comfortable and 
affordable , many people may shift from owning to sharing vehicles. However, if they are  
unreliable, uncomfortable or expensive, more households will continue to own privat e vehicles.  
 Public policies.  Implementation could be accelerated if public policies encourage autonomous 
vehicle development and purchase, if road and parking pricing, and roadway management favor 
shared vehicles, i f highway lanes are dedicated to autonomo us vehicle platooning, if 
development policies allow more infill development, if autonomous operation is required for 
new vehicles, or if governments support scrap ping a major portion otherwise functional  vehicles  
because they lack autonomous driving capab ility.  
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
32 
 Planning Implications  
Autonomous vehicle s raise various planning  issues (Taeihagh and Lim 2018) :  
 
Roadway Design  
Autonomous vehicles may require new ro adway design features such as improved  lane 
markings , signs designed to be read electronically,  and wireless repeaters in tunnels to provide  
internet access.  Autonomous driving may allow narrower traffic lanes, but  to accommodate 
trucks and buses, large  reductions are only feasible on  special  lanes  limited to  car traffic.  As 
autonomou s vehicles become more common, governments will be asked to dedicate highway 
lanes to their use, to allow platooning. Similarly, autonomous vehicles could eliminate the need 
for traffic signals, but this is only feasible in areas where all vehicle traffic is autonomous.  To 
encourage shifts from lower - to higher -occupancy vehicle travel on congested corridors, 
governments may need to establish more HOV priority lanes.  
 
Transportation Pricing  
As previously described, with current policies, electric autonomous  vehicles are likely to 
increase vehicle travel and traffic problems, typically by 10 -30%, by reducing travel time and 
vehicle operating costs, stimul ating more sprawled development and  increasing deadheading 
(empty vehicle travel). In addition, electric v ehicles currently pay no road user fees , which is 
unfair. To address  these problems governments will need to impose new  fees , which could 
include a combination of road user charges of 4 -8₵ per vehicle -mile, plus decongestion pricing 
of 5-30₵ per vehicle mi le when operating in congested conditions (Simoni, et al. 2019).  
 
Curb Management  
To facilitate vehicle sharing, cities will need to manage curbs to provide convenient passenger 
loading and unloading  (Marsden , Docherty and  Dowling  2020; OECD/ITF 2018).  This involves  
providing passenger loading areas , or by managing on -street parking to increase turnover so at 
least one u noccupied space is usually available near every  destination.  
 
Parking Planning  
Autonomous vehicles can affect future parking demands in many ways (Chai,  et al. 2020; 
González -González, Nogués and Stead  2020; Marsden, Docherty and Dowling  2020; Zhang and 
Kaidi Wang 2020). Electric autonomous vehicles will require special parking facilities with 
electric charging stations and vehicle cleanin g and maintenance services.  Optimists predict that 
autonomous vehicle s will significantly reduce parking demands and costs. A shift from private 
to shared vehicles can reduce  total  vehicle ownership and parking needs, and private vehicle  
owners may program  their cars to return home after dropping off passengers , althoug h that 
will increase traffic problems  and add delays and uncertainty  as to when passengers could be 
picked up. Most traveler s will probably want their vehicles  to be available with in a few  minutes, 
which will require parki ng within a mile or two of  their  destination. This may allow more off -site 
and shared parking, reducing but not eliminating  urban parking demand s. 
 
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
33 
 Public Transit Needs  
Autonomous vehicles can affect public transit demands in several ways.  
 Since labor represents the majority of  transit operating costs, autonomous technologies could 
significantly reduce the costs of providing transit services. With a given budget , transit agencies 
can provide more frequent service using small er vehicles, and in some situations, have flexible 
routes that deliver passengers closer to their destinations (paratransit).  
 Cheaper taxi services can provide convenient mobility for non -drivers, either door -to-door or as 
a feeder to bus stops and train s tations. This should be particularly effective in suburban and 
rural areas where conventional transit is inefficient.  
 They can reduce conventional transit demand , which reduces revenue , cost efficiency  and 
political support, resulting in reduced ser vice q uality . Because paratransit  require s more road 
space and energy than public transit , shift s from public transit to autonomous vehicles  are likely 
to increase  traffic congestion, accidents and pollution emissions . 
 
Some advocates claim that autonomous vehic les eliminate the need for conventional public 
transit services, but high capacity transit will still be needed on major travel corridors, and 
autonomous technologies can support transit by reducing operating costs and improving access 
to stops and station s (ITF 2014; TRB 2017). To avoid  potential problems many experts 
recommend that governments impose efficient road  pricing, develop high occupancy vehicle 
lanes  and improve public transit services on busy travel corridors  in order to limit  traffic  
congestio n and maintain transit system efficiency .  
 
Other  Trends Affecting Travel Demands  
Autonomous vehicle development is just one of many trends that will affect future transport 
demands and planning needs, as illustrated in Exhibit 21. Changes in demographics, consumer 
preferences, prices, information technologies,  mobility options, and other planning innovations 
may have greater impacts than autonomous vehicles  for the foreseeable future .    
 
Exhibit 21 Factors Affecting Transport Demands and Costs  
 
Autonomous vehicles are one of many factors affecting future transport demands.  
 
 
 Improved user information/navigation  
Electronic pricing  
Autonomous  vehicles  
 
 
 Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)  Changing User Preferences  
Less driving  
Shared rather than private vehicles  
More walking & cycling  
 More urban living  Price Change s 
Rising fuel prices  
Efficient road & parking pricing  Demographic Trends  
Aging p opulation  
More working at home  
Reduced youth drivers’ license  
 
 Improved Travel Options  
Better walking and cycling  
Improved public transit  
Telework and delivery services  
Carsharing  
 
Planning Innovations  
Expanded objectives  
Systems operations  
Demand management  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
34 
 Some benefits, such as reduced driver stress, can  occur with Level 2 -4 automation, but most  
benefits  require Level 5 automation , and some only occur when they are shared , or if  have 
dedicated  lanes . The following matrix summarized the benefits  provided by various AV types . 
 
Exhibit 2 2 Autonomous Vehicle Benefits  
Autonomous Ve hicle 
Types  Mobility for 
Non-drivers  Reduced 
Driver Stress  User 
Savings  Occupant 
Safety  External 
Benefits  
Level 1 -4 private  vehicles     ?  
Level 5 private  vehicles      ? 
Shared autonomous vehicles       
Shared autonomous rides       
Dedicated AV lanes      ? 
Various types of autonomous vehicles provide different types of benefits. Many benefits require Level 5 
and shared vehicles.  
 
 
Exhibit 23 is a timeline for  autonomous vehicle planning issues.  
 
Exhibit 23 Autonomous Vehicle Planning Issues (Henaghan 2018; Largo, et al. 2018)  
Issue  Analysis Required  Policies Required  Time  
Reliability and 
safety  Evaluate  reliability  and safety . 
Estab lish regulatory framework . Define performance, testing and data 
requirements for AV operation  on public roads.  2020 -30 
Overall travel 
impacts  Investigate travel changes, and 
likely benefits and costs.  Transport management to reduce congestion, 
accidents and emissions.  2020 -
2040  
Local vehicle traffic 
impacts  Investigate changes in motor 
vehicle traffic and their impacts.  Decongestion pricing, vehicle restrictions, HOV 
priority, and policies that favor shared rides.  2020 -40 
Safety  Investigate new risks , crash impacts 
particularly  to other road users.  Regulate AVs to ensure safety for all road users. 
Price and manage roads for safety.  2020-60s 
Mobility for non -
drivers  Autonomous vehicle availability 
and affordability to non -drivers.  Policies that ensure that AVs serve people with 
disabilities and low incomes . 2020 -30s 
Impacts on vehicle 
sharing  Quality of shared autonomous 
vehicles and rides  Regulate and encourage shared autonomous 
vehicles and rides  2030 -40s 
Energy and 
emission impacts  AV fuel type and consumption. 
Impacts on total vehicle travel.  Encourage efficient and electric AVs. P rice and 
manage roads  to minimize total vehicle travel.  2030-60s 
Parking and 
passenger loading  Impacts on vehicle ownership and 
use, and parking  and loading  needs . Reduce parking requirements  and efficiently 
manage  parking and  curb space .  2040 -50s 
Roadway design  Impacts on  roadway traffic and 
design needs.  Change roadway designs. Consider creating AV 
lanes. Determine the ir funding and pricing.  2050 -70s 
Plan for mixed 
traffic  Degree of conflicts between AVs 
and other road users.  Develop polices and facility designs to minimize 
conflicts and risks.  2040 -60s 
Autonomous 
vehicle mandates  Potential benefits of mandating 
AVs.  If benefits are very large, require all vehicles to 
be AVs and rest rict human driving.  2060 -80s 
This table identifies various needs and requirements to achieve autonomous vehicle planning objectives.  
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
35 
  
Because pedestrians and bicyclists are difficult for sensors to see,  and less predictable than 
motor vehicles, autonomous vehicles may impose special risks on non -motorized traveler s. The 
Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center identifies ten risks that autonomous vehicles can 
impose on pedestrians and cyclists and how t hese can be minimized (PBIC 2017). Appleyard and 
Riggs (2018) identify  planning  principles to ensure that  autonomous vehicles support 
community livability  goals  by improving  driving behavior (slower speeds and enhanced ability to 
yield and stop) , improving  walking and bicycling conditions , and reducing parking needs .  
 
Autonomous vehicle benefits will depend on public policies. The following table compares 
optimistic and pessimistic outcomes of autonomous vehicle policies.  
 
Exhibit 2 4 Optimistic and Pessim istic Outcomes  (based on Papa and Ferrei ra 2018)  
Issues  Optimistic Outcome  Pessimistic Outcome  
Sharing  Policies encourage vehicle sharing . AVs are promoted as private luxury goods.  
Social 
inclusion  Policies designed to maximize AV affordability and 
accessibility  ensure that they are widely available . AVs are only affordable and available by  privileged  
(affluent) users . 
Environmental 
sustainability  AV policies support environmental goals . AV policies give little consideration of  to 
environmental goals. 
Public 
transport  Public  policies support p ublic transport, providing 
funding and favoring shared vehicles in traffic . Public  policies focus too much on AVs and fail to 
support public transport.  
Intermodal 
management  AVs are programmed to minimize  risks and delay 
to other road users . AVs are programed to favor  occupants over other 
road users.  
Data Network  Data networks are designed to maximize overall 
transport system efficiency and sustainability.  Data networks are designed to maximize profits, so 
critical information is sold . 
Sensitive data 
management  Personal data are carefully managed based on 
general public interest.  Abundant personal d ata collected by  AVs are used 
for commercial purposes.  
Parking  Parking facilities  are converted into building s, 
active transport  infrastructure and greenspace . Parking policies remain as they are , so parking 
continues to  consume valuable  land.  
Curb Access  Curb access is efficiently managed to serve shared 
vehicle passengers along with other uses.  Curb space is congested and dangerous, and other 
others (pedestrian and bicyclists) are harmed.  
Land use 
policies  Urban areas  become more attractive place s to 
live. Transport policies  promote quality of life.  Urban land is  managed  to accommodate AV  travel,  
to the detr iment of  other social groups.  
Transport 
planning  Transport planning is multi -modal, and favors 
resource -efficient  modes.  Transport planning favors  AVs, for example, with 
dedicated lanes and low user fees . 
Autonomous vehicles raise many policy and planning issues.  
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
36 
 The timeline below summarizes autonomous vehicle planning requirements . 
 
Exhibit 2 5 Autonomous Vehicle Planning Requirement  Time -Line 
 
Develop performance 
and data collection 
requirements for 
autonomous vehicles 
operating on public 
roadw ays.  Study, and where appropriate 
support, autonomous vehicle 
implementation for specific 
applications such as taxi, 
carsharing and demand 
response services.   If autonomous vehicles prove 
overall beneficial and are the 
majority of vehicles, it may be 
possible to change roadway 
design and management 
practices.  
      
2020 2030s 2040s     2050s 2060s 2070s+  
       
 
Support large -scale testing.  
Evaluate their benefits and 
costs under actual operating 
conditions.   If autonomous vehicles 
prove to  be effective and 
common, consider 
dedicating some highway 
lanes to their use.   If autonomous vehicles 
prove to be very 
beneficial, it may be 
appropriate to restrict 
human -driving.  
 
This timeline summarizes how autonomous vehicles are likely to impact transport planning.  
 
 
Autonomous Taxi Service Impacts  
In 2017 Waymo and Uber started  testing driverless taxis in  the Phoenix , Arizona region.  (Bergen 2017; Lee 
2017). Within a few months a pedestrian death put the program on hold but it was soon reestablished.  
 
Phoenix  was chosen because it has  a mild climate , wide streets  and relatively few pedestrians.  The 
vehicles are relatively slow.  Further  development and testing  is required  before the technology can 
expand to cities with more severe  weather or congestion, and its expansion will depend on the service’s 
profitability , which will require high consumer confidence  and satisfaction, and cost reductions . As a 
result, it will probably take several years before commercial autonomous taxi services are widely  available.  
 
Taxis primarily serve local urban trips when traveler s lack a p rivate  vehicle, which represents a minor 
portion of total travel. To significa ntly reduce vehicle travel and associa ted costs, autonomous taxis  must  
become inexpensive, ubiquitous and integrated with other mobility options so households can reduce 
their vehicle ownership and rely on  shared  vehicle s. This can be accelerated by public  policies that 
discourage private vehicle ownership and encourage sharing, such as reduced parking supply, High 
Occupancy Vehicle Lanes, and convenient passenger loading  areas.  
 
This is consistent with predictions that during the 2020s autonomous vehicles will have  limited availability 
and performance. If the technology improves and become affordable  and reliable , so self-driving taxi 
services become profitable, they can expand to serve more  areas and trip types. However, until most 
households shift from ow ning vehicles to relying on shared mobility services, and until a greater share of 
households live in compact and multi -modal neighborhoods, autonomous taxis will affect only a small 
portion of total travel and provide modest community benefits.  
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
37 
 Potent ial Conflicts and Solutions  
There are potential conflicts between user and community goals in autonomous vehicle design 
and programming. For example, if programmed to maximize passenger comfort they may 
reduce traffic speeds, and if programmed to protect occupants they may increase c rash risk to 
other road users. Some bene fits (reduced congestion and possibly pollution emissions) require 
dedicated  autonomous vehicle lanes , which  raise fairness, pricing and e nforcement  concerns . 
 
There are also potential planning conflicts. By increasi ng total vehicle travel , encouraging 
dispersed development , and displacing public transit, autonomous vehicles could exacerbate 
congestion, sprawl and inequity  problems . Shared vehicles reduce parking demand but increase 
the need for passenger loading  facilities  (OECD/ITF 2018). Some  public interest organizations 
have developed guidelines for optimizing autonomous vehicle benefits  (Fulton, Mason and 
Meroux  2017; Kaohsiung EcoMobility Festival 2017) . The box below summarizes one example.  
 
Shared Mobility Principles for Livable Cities  (www.sharedmobilityprinciples.org ) 
1. Plan our cities and their mobility together.  
2. Prioritize people over vehicles.  
3. Support the shared and efficient use of 
vehicles, lanes,  curbs, and land.  
4. Engage with stakeholders.  
5. Promote equity.  6. Lead the transition towards clean  and renewable energy.  
7. Support fair user fees across all modes.  
8. Aim for public benefits via open data.  
9. Work towards integration and seamless connectivity.  
10. In dense  urban areas autonomous vehicles  should  only  
operate  in shared fleets.  
 
 
The following strategies  can help maximize autonomous vehicle  benefits and minimize their 
social costs  (Larco, et al. 2018; González -González,  Lynott 2018;  Nogués and Stead  2020; 
Schlossberg, et al. 2018; TRB 2017 ; WEF 2020 ): 
 Emphasize social goals such as transport system efficiency  and equity.   
 Test and regulate new technologies for safety and efficiency.  
 Ensure responsible collection, storage and sharing of key data, such as vehicle trips and conflicts  
to measure positive and negative impacts . Encourage data system and platform interoperability.  
 Require autonomous vehicles to be programed based on ethical and community goals.  
 Implement policies, such as efficient pricing and vehicle  priority  in traffic , to favor higher value 
trips and  more space -efficient travel, and to  limit vehicle  traffic  volumes  to optimal levels.   
 Ensure that shared autonomous services are affordable and serve people with special needs.  
 Integrate shared au tonomous services into multi -modal transportation systems, for example, to 
provide last-mile access to public transit stations and to reduce traffic lanes so more road space 
is available for bikelanes, sidewalks and greenspaces.  
 Incorporate universal design  that accommodates people with special needs and abilities.  
 Use vehicle traffic reductions to redesign streets and improve urban livability.  
 Reduce parking minimums and public parking  to take advantage of shared vehicles. Use reduced 
parking needs to  increase urban densities and greenspace.  
 Efficiently price development to prevent inefficient sprawl.  
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
38 
 Conclusions  
Many people wonder how soon  autonomous vehicles will help solve  transportation problems. 
Optimists  predict that by 2030 , autonomous vehicle s will be sufficiently reliable , affordable  and 
common  to displace most human  driving , providing huge savings and benefits . However, there 
are good reasons to be skeptical.  Most optimistic predictions are made by people with financial 
interests in the indu stry, based on experience with disruptive technologies such as digital 
cameras, smart phones and personal computers. They tend to ignore significant  obstacles  to 
autonomous vehicle development  and exaggerate  future  benefits .  
 
There is considerable uncerta inty concerning  autonomous vehicle  development,  demands, 
benefits,  costs , and  travel impacts . Operating a vehicle on public roads is  complicated due to 
frequen t interactions with often -unpredictable animals, people  and vehicle s. Considerable  
progress is  needed before autonomous vehicles can operate reliably in mixed urban traffic, 
heavy rain and snow, unpaved and unmapped roads, and with unreliable  wireless service . Years 
of testing and regulatory approval are required  before they are  commercially availab le in m ost 
jurisdictions . The first commercially  available  autonomous veh icles are likely to be ex pensive , 
limited in performance , and will introduce new risks. These constraints will limit sales . Many 
motorists will be reluctant to pay thousands of extra  dollars  for vehicle s that will sometimes be 
unable to reach a destination  due to inclement weather or unmapped roads. Vehicles last 
longer, cost more,  impose larger external costs , and are more highly regulated  than most other 
consumer goods , so new  vehicle technologies  are slow  to penetrate  markets . It wil l probably 
take decades for most vehicles to be autonomous , and some  motorists may resist them . 
 
Optimistically,  Level 5  autonomous vehicle s will be safe and reliable by 2025. A  few more  years 
will be required for testing and  regulatory approval , so by 2030, autonomous vehicles may  be 
commercially available  and allowed  to operate in many  areas . If they follow the pattern of 
previous vehicle technologies, d uring the 20 30s and probably  the 20 40s, they will be expensive 
and limited in performance , sometimes  unable to reach a desired destination or requiring 
human intervention when they encounter  unexpected situation s. Customers will include 
affluent  high -annual -mileage motorists , and businesses that  use vehi cles to transport 
equipment and goods . For the foreseeable future  most moderate - and low -income households  
will continue to  use human -operated vehicles . It will probably be the  2050s before  private  
autonomous vehicles  are affordable to most middle - and lower -income motorists . 
 
Shared autonomous vehicles (s elf-driving taxi s) and rides  (micro-transit services ) are being 
tested  in some jurisdictions  but it will probably be the 2030s before they are widely available . 
Shared vehicles  have moderate operating costs and offer moderate convenience and comfort.  
They should  be cheaper than current taxi and ridehailing  services , but offer less service since no 
driver will be  available to assist  passengers , provide security, or clean vehicles . Vehicle 
dispatching will sometimes  be slow and unpredictable , particularly in less dense  areas . Shared 
rides  have the lowest costs but the least convenience and comfort  since collecting  passenger s 
add delays, they  cannot provide door -to-door service, and passengers must  share confined 
spaces with strangers.  Because of these limitations, shared vehicles  and rides  will primarily 
serve  urban trips  and are unlikely to dominate suburban and rural travel .  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
39 
  
This analysis sugges ts that it will be at least 2045 before most vehicles are autonomous, and 
longer  before they  are affordable. Significantly faster deployment will require scrapping most 
otherwise functional vehicles that lack self -driving ability. Some benefits, such as re duced driver 
stress and independent mobility for affluent non -drivers, can occur when autonomous vehicles 
are relatively costly and rare. However, most benefits, such as independent mobility for 
moderate -income non -drivers, can only be significant if they become common and affordable, 
and some benefits, such as reduced congestion  and emissions , require dedicated lanes to allow 
platooning. Their  social  equity impacts are mixed, they are likely to reduce some external costs 
but increase others, and they can b enefit some disadvantaged groups but harm others, 
particularly if they induce additional vehicle travel and sprawl. Self-driving  taxies and micro -
transit services can provide greater  efficiency and equity  benefits , particularly  if public policies 
favor sha red vehicle  travel, with decongestion pricing and high -occupancy vehicle lanes . 
 
Many predictions assume that most autonomous vehicles will be electric, which have low fuel 
costs but require costly batteries and currently pay no fuel taxes. Incorporating b attery 
replacement costs and efficient road user fees increases electric vehicle operating costs to be 
similar to fossil fuel vehicles. Because of their high labor costs and predictable routes , self-
driving  buses and trucks may become common  relatively qui ckly but m any of these  vehicles will 
still need employees on board to  provide passenger assistance , security , loading and unloading.  
 
The figure below illustrates  market penetration and benefit  predictions . Level 4 autonomy (able 
to operate autonomously under limited conditions , such as on grade -separated highways ) can 
reduce driver stress and increase productivity, but most benefits require Level 5 autonomy 
(able to operate autonomously under all normal conditions) so vehicles can transport non -
drivers a nd travel  empty to  pick up or drop off  passengers.  Some benefits, such as independent 
mobility for affluent non -drivers, may occur while autonomous vehicles are expensive and rare, 
but most benefits require that they be affordable and common, which will ta ke decades.  
 
Exhibit 26 Autonomous Vehicle Sales, Fleet , Travel  and Benefit  Projections  
  
This analysis suggests 
that it will be at least 
2045 before half of new 
vehicles are autonomous, 
and 2060 before most of 
the vehicle fleet is 
autonomous. Some 
benefits can occur when 
autonomous vehicles are 
expensive and rare, but 
most benefits will only be 
significant when they are 
affordable and common.  

Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
40 
  
 
An important planning issue is whether autonomous vehicles will increase or reduce total 
vehicle travel a nd associated traffic problems. It could go either way.  By increasing non -drivers ’ 
vehicle travel , increasing travel convenience and comfort,  reducing vehicle operating costs,  
generating empty travel,  and encouraging longer -distance commutes and more spraw led 
development,  they can increase  vehicle travel . This additional vehicle travel provides marginal 
consumer benefits, and since vehicle travel imposes  significant  external costs, much of the 
additional vehicle travel is likely to be economically inefficie nt: its user  benefits will be  less than 
total incremental costs. Alternatively, autonomous operation  may facilitate vehicle sharing, 
allow ing households to reduce veh icle ownership  and vehicle travel.  This suggests that  AVs will 
increase  vehicle travel in  suburban and rural areas , and reduce it in urban areas . Their net 
impacts  will depend on transport and land use development  policies . With current policies, 
vehicle travel and sprawl are likely to increase 10 -30%. More efficient pricing, and roadway 
manage ment which favors shared vehicles, can reduce vehicle travel and associated problems.  
 
Another  critical issue is the degree that potential benefits can be achieved when only a portion 
of vehicle travel is autonomous. Some benefits, such as improved mobilit y for affluent non -
drivers, may occur when autonomous vehicles are uncommon and costly, but many potential 
benefits, such as reduced congestion and emission rates, reduced traffic signals and lane 
widths, require that vehicles operate autonomously  in dedicated lanes .  
 
Some public interest organizations have developed guidelines for optimizing autonomous 
vehicle benefits. These emphasize social goals such as overall system -wise safety and efficient, 
and transportation demand management to limit vehicle  travel to roadway capacity and favor 
high -occupancy over lower -occupancy vehicles.  
 
Autonomous vehicle implementation is just one of many trends likely to affect future transport 
demands and impacts , and not necessarily the most important. Their  ultimate  impacts depend 
on how autonomous vehicles  interact with other tren ds, such as shifts from private  to shared 
vehicles. Autonomous vehicles will probably not  be a “game changer ” during most of our lives, 
and will only cause  a “paradigm shift ” if this techno logy causes large  shifts from private  to 
shared vehicles  and creates more multi -modal communities .  
 
Transportation professionals have important roles to play in autonomous vehicle development 
and deployment. We must anticipate how new technologies and ser vices are likely to affect 
road, parking  and public transit  needs, and how to respond  to minimize problems and maximize 
total benefits . We can help define the standards they must meet to legally operate on public 
roads. We should evaluate their benefits an d costs and develop policies to maximize net 
benefits and ensure that their deployment supports strategic community goals.  
  
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
41 
 References  
 
AAA ( annual reports ), Your Driving Costs , American Automobile Association ( http://newsroom.aaa.com ); at 
https://publicaffairsresources.aaa.biz/YDC/html5/index.html .  
 
AAA (2018),  Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) Repair Costs , Fact Sheet, AAA News  Room 
(https://newsroom.aaa.com ); at https://bit.ly/39JO6CI .  
 
Evan Ackerman (2017), “Toyota's Gill Pratt on Self -Driving Cars and the Reality of Full Autonomy,” 
Spectrum , Inte rnational Institute of Electrical Engineers ( www.ieee.org ); at https://bit.ly/2FJYJax .  
 
Air Quality Expert Group (2020), Non-Exhaust Emissions from Road Traffic , UK Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs ( https://uk -air.defra.gov.uk ); at https://bit.ly/2Ufin64 . 
 
APA (2016), Autonomous Vehicle s: Knowledgebase Collection , American Planning A ssociation 
(www.planning.org ); at www.planning.org/knowledgebase/autonomousvehicles .  
 
Bruce Appleyard and William Riggs (2018), 10 Principles Toward More Sharing and Less Sprawl : A Manifesto 
for Street Livability, Health, and Humanity in the Era of Driverless Cars , Planetizen ( www.planetizen.com ); at 
www.planetizen.com/node/96769 .  
 
Jaâfar Berrada and Fabien Leurent (2017), “Modeling Transportation Systems involving Autonomous 
Vehicles: State of the Art,” Transportation Research Procedia , Vol . 27, pp.  215-221 (https://bit.ly/2IK9iwO ).  
 
Brad Berman (2011), History of Hybrid Vehicles , Hybrid Cars ( www.hybridcars.com ); at 
https://bit.ly/2z9aSEg . 
 
Patrick Bösch, et al.  (2017), Cost -based Analysis of Autonomous Mobility Services , Working Paper  1225,  
Institute for Transport Planning and Systems  (www.ivt.ethz.ch ); at https://bit.ly/3glVlpW . 
 
Meredith Broussard (2018) , “The Dirty Truth Coming for Self -Driving Cars: Trash. Odors. Bodily Fluids. Will 
Autonomous Rideshares be Ready for our Mess?” Slate  (https://slate.com ); at https://slate.me /2Ls9IrI .  
 
Huajun  Chai,  et al. (2020), The Impacts of Automated Vehicles on Center City Parking Demand , National 
Center for Sustainable Transport ( https://ncst.ucdavis.edu ); at https://bit.ly/2CxLAEc .   
 
Giovanni Circella  and Scott Hardman (2022), Driverless Cars Won’t be Good for the Environment if They 
Lead to More Auto  Use, The Conversation ( https ://theconversation.com ); at https://bit.ly/3gkmrgO .  
 
CPUC (2020), Autonomous Vehicle Pilot Permits Issued , California Public Utilities Commission 
(www.cpuc.ca.gov/avcissued ).  
 
Hana Creger, Joel Espino and Alvaro S.  Sanchez (2019 ), Autonomous Vehicle Heaven or H ell? Creating a 
Transportation Revolution that Benefits All, Greenlining  (http://greenlining.org ); at https://bit.ly/2W710ab .  
 
Angela DeLuca  (2018), Ending the Search for Parking , Urbanism Next 
(https://urbanismnext.uoregon.edu ); at https://bit.ly/2q6uTWD .  
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
42 
 Stephen Dirksen (1997), Air Bags: History of American Technology , Bryant University Community Web 
(http://web.bryant.edu/~ehu/h364proj/sprg_97/dirksen/airbags.html ). 
 
Dawn Project (2022), Tesla Full Self -driving Safety Analysis , The Dawn Project: Making Computers Safe for 
Humanity  (https://dawnproject.com ); at https://bit.ly/3rlvh4q .  
 
The Economist (2019), Driverless Cars are Stuck in a Jam, 10 October ( www.economist.com ); at 
www.economist.com/leaders/2019/10/10/driverless -cars-are-stuck -in-a-jam. 
 
John Eddy and  Ryan Falconer (2017), A Civil Debate: Are Driverless Cars Good for Cities? , Doggerel 
(http://doggerel.arup.com ); at https://bit.ly/3Hl2sdX . 
 
Kevin Eykholt , et al.  (2018), “ Robust Physical -World Attacks on Deep Learning Models ,” Cryptography and 
Security  (https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.08945 ).  
 
Fehr & Peers (2014), Effects of Next -Generation Vehicles on Travel Demand & Highway Capacity , Fehr and 
Peers ( www.fehrandpeers.com ); at www.fehrandpeers.com/fpthink/nextgenerationvehicles .  
 
FHWA ( 2018 ), Highway Statistics , Federal Highway Administration ( www.fhwa.dot.gov ); at 
www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics.cfm . 
 
Kelly Fleming and Mark Singer (2019), Energy Implications of Current Travel and the Adoption of Automated 
Vehicles , National Renewable Energy Laboratory; at www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/72675.pdf .  
 
Lew Fulton, Jacob Mason and Dominique Meroux  (2017), Three Revolutions in Urban Transportation , UC 
Davis and ITDP  (www.itdp.org ); at www.itdp.org/publication/3rs -in-urban -transport .  
 
Lewis Fulton, Junia Compostella and Alimurtaza Kothawala (2020) , Estimating th e Costs of New Mobility 
Travel Options: Monetary and Non -Monetary Factors , National Center for Sustainable Transportation 
(https://escholarship.org/uc/itsdavis_ncst ); at ( https://doi.org/10.7922/G20R9MN8 ). 
 
GAO (2016), Vehicle Cybersecurity: DOT and Industry Have Efforts Under Way, but DOT Needs to Define Its 
Role in Responding to a Real -world Attack , GAO (www.gao.gov ); at https://bit.ly/1ruZi09 . 
 
GM (20 20), OnStar Services (www.onstar.com ).   
 
Lee Gomes (2014), “Hidden Obstacles for Google’s Self -Driving Cars ,” MIT Technological Review , 
(www.technologyreview.com ), 28 August 2014; at  https://bit.ly/2B6BUxx .   
 
Esther González -González, Soledad Nogués and Dominic Stead  (2020), Parking Futures: Preparing European 
Cities for the Advent of Automated  Vehicles , Land Use Policy , Vol. 90 
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.05.029 ). 
 
David G. Groves  and Nidhi Kalra  (2017), Enemy of Good: Autonomous Vehicle Safety Scenario Explorer , Rand 
Corporation www.rand.org ); at www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL279.html .  
 
Bern Grush (2016), Driverless  Cars Ahead: Ontario Must Prepare for Vehicle Automation , Residential and 
Civil Construction Alliance of Ontario (RCCAO); at  https://bit.ly/2DFNNwy .   
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
43 
  
Bern Grush and John Niles (2018) , The End of Driving: Transportat ion Systems and Public Policy Planning for 
Autonomous Vehicles , Elsevier  (www.elsevier.com/books/the -end-of-driving/niles/978 -0-12-815451 -9).  
 
Erick Guerra (2015), “Planning for Cars that Drive Themselves: Metropolitan Planning Organizations, 
Regional Transportation Plans, and Autonomous Vehicles,” Journal of Planning Education and Research , pp. 
1–15 (DOI: 10.1177/0739456X15613591); at http://bit.ly/1RqcBaZ .  
 
Subhrajit Guhathakurta and Amit Kumar (2019), “When and Where are Dedicated Lanes Needed under 
Mixed Traffic of Automated and Non -Automated Vehicles for Optimal System Level Benefits? ,” Center for 
Transp ortation, Equity, Decisions and Dollars ( https://ctedd.uta.edu ); at https://bit.ly/3lgxA6l . 
 
Mustapha Harb, et al. (2018), “Projecting Travelers into a World of Self -Driving Vehic les,” Transportation , 
Vol. 45, pp. 1671 -1685 ( https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11116 -018-9937 -9).  
 
Mark Harris (2014), “ FBI Warns Driverless Cars Could Be Used As 'L ethal Weapons' ” The Guardian  
(www.theguardian.com ), 16 July 2014; at  https://bit.ly/1p7fQU6 .  
 
Andrew Hawkins (2017), “ Tesla’s Autopilot is Supposed to Deliver Full Self -Driving, So Why Does it Feel 
Stuck in the Past? ,” The Verge (www.theverge.com ); at https://bit.ly/2Fmtfed .   
 
James R. Healey (2012), “Stick Shifts Popular A gain, Despite Lower Gas Mileage,” USA Today , 30 April 
(www.usatoday.com ); at https://bit.ly/2FoFPdc .     
 
Kevin Heaslip, et al. (2020), Assessment of Capacity Changes Due to Aut omated Vehicles on Interstate 
Corridors , Virginia Transportation Research Council ( www.virginiadot.org ); at  https://bit.ly/3Aghf71 .   
 
Jennifer Henaghan (2018), Preparing Communities for Autonomous Vehicles , American Planning Association 
(www.planning.org ); at https://bit.ly/2piKBhX .   
 
Alexandro Henao and Wes Marshall (2018), “The Impact of Ridehail ing on Vehicle Miles Traveled,”  
Transportation  (https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116 -018-9923 -2).  
 
Jeremy Hsu (2017), “When It Comes to Safety, Autonomous Cars Are Still ‘Teen Drivers,’” Scientific 
American  (www.scientificamerican.com ); at http://bit.ly/2j9gFPT .  
 
Kyle Hyatt (2020), Toyota had the Most Autonomous Vehicle Disengagements , Road Show ( www.cnet.com ); 
at www.cnet.com/roadshow/news/2019 -california -self-driving -disengagement -report -baidu -waymo -cruise .  
 
Intellias (2018), How a Self -Driving Car Could Save You Money ; at https://bit.ly/36ZVBDD . 
 
ITF (2014), Urban Mobility: System Upgrade , International Transport Forum 
(www.internationaltransportforum.org ) and Corporate Partnership Board ; at https://bit.ly/2JJrWUo .  
 
ITF (2018), Safer Roads with Automated Vehicles?  International Transport Forum ( www.itf -oecd.org ); at 
www.itf -oecd.org/sites/default/file s/docs/safer -roads -automated -vehicles.pdf .  
 
Tay Hong Chuen, et al. (2013), Autonomous Vehicles , MT5009; at https://bit.ly/2RTGdS7 .   
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
44 
  
Charlie Johnston and Jonathan Walker (2017), Peak Car Ownership: The Market Opport unity for Electric 
Automated Mobility Services , Rocky Mountain Institute ( www.rmi.org ); at http://bit.ly/2rhJRNi .  
 
Kaohsiung EcoMobility Festival (2017), Kaohsiung Strategies for the  Future of Urban Mobility , 
EcoMobility Festival ( www.ecomobilityfestival.org ); at https://bit.ly/2OMwsDD .   
 
Tasha Keeney (2017), Mobility -As-A-Service: Why Self -Driving Cars Could Change Everything , ARC 
Investment Research ( http://research.ark -invest.com ); at http://bit.ly/2xz6PNV . 
 
Irem Kok, et al. (2017), Rethinking Transportation 2 020-2030: Disruption of Transportation and the Collapse 
of the Internal -Combustion Vehicle &  Oil Industries , RethinkX  (www.rethinkx.com ); at http://bit.ly/2pL0cZV .  
 
Kara Kockelman, et al. (2016), Implications of Connected and Automated Vehicles on the Safety and 
Operations of Roadway Networks , University of Texas Center for Transportation Research 
(http://ctr.utexas.edu ); at http://library.ctr.utexas.edu/ctr -publications/0 -6849 -1.pdf .  
 
Kara Kockelman and Stephen  Boyles (2018), Smart Transport for Cities & Nations: The Rise of Self -Driving & 
Connected Vehic les, The University of Texas at Austin ( www.caee.utexas.edu ); at https://bit.ly/3gDpEaa .  
 
Philip Koopman and Michael Wagner (2017), “Autonomous Vehicle Safety: An Interdisci plinary Challenge,” 
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems , Vol. 9, No. 1; at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7823109 . 
 
Will Knight (2020), “Snow and Ice Pose a Vexing Obstacle for Self-Driving Cars ,” Wired Magazine ; at 
www.wired.com/story/snow -ice-pose -vexing -obstacle -self-driving -cars.  
 
Nico Larco, et al. (2018), AVs in the Pacific Northwest : Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions in a Time of 
Automation , Urbanism Next Center ( https://urbanismnext.uoregon.edu ): at https://bit.ly/2MHIXix .  
 
Nico Larco (2022),  The Road Ahead for Automated Vehicles , U.S. House of Representatives Committee on 
Transportation & Infrastructure  Director , Urbanism Next Center, University of Oregon  
(www.urbanismnext.org ); at https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=114362 .  
 
Mohammad Lavasani  and Xia Jin (2016),  “Market Penetration  Model for Autonomous Vehicles on the Basis 
of Earlier  Technology Adoption Experience ,” Transportation Research Record 2597 , pp.  67–74 
(DOI:  10.3141/2597 -09). 
 
Steve Lawson (2018),  Tackling the Transition to Automated Vehicles, Roads that Cars Can Read Report  III, 
European Road Assessment Association ( www.eurorap.org ); at https://bit.ly/2IrYTTQ .   
 
Scott Le Vine,  Alireza Zolfaghari  and John Polak  (2015) , “Autonomous Cars: Tensi on Between Occupant -
Experience a nd Intersection Capacity, ” Transportation Research C  (doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2015.01.002 ).  
 
John J. Leonard, David A. Mindell and Erik L. Stayton (2020), Autonomous Vehicles, Mobility, and 
Employment Policy: The Roads Ahead , MIT Work of the Future ( https://workofthefuture.mit.edu ); at 
https://bit.ly/3eTRWeA .   
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
45 
 Jamie Lendino (2012), “The History of Car GPS Navigation,” PC Magazine ( www.pcmag.com ), 16 April; at 
www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2402755,00.asp .  
 
Todd Litman (2009), Transportation Cost and Benefit Analysis , Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
(www.vtpi.org/tca ). 
 
Todd Litman (2013), “The New Transportation Planning Paradigm,” ITE Journal  (www.ite.org ), Vo. 83, No. 6, 
pp. 20 -28, 2013; at www.vtpi.org/paradigm.pdf . 
 
Todd Litman (2014), “Ready or Waiting,” Traffic Technology International  
(www.traffictechnologytoday.com ), January, pp. 36 -42; at  www.vtpi.org/AVIP_TTI_Jan2014.pdf .  
 
Todd Litman (2017), Presentation to the Canadian Standing Senate Committee on Transport and 
Communication Concerning Connected and Self -driving Vehicles  (http://bit.ly/2u2Grhe ).  
 
Todd Litman (20 21), New Mobilities: Smart Planning for Emerging Transportation Technologies , Island 
Press (https://islandpress.org/books/new -mobilities ).  
 
Kristin  Lovejoy, Susan Handy and Marlon G. Boarnet (2013) , Technical Background Document on Impacts 
of Carsharing , California Air Resources Board ( www.arb.ca.gov ); at https://bit.ly/2P3tlqM .  
 
Jana Lynott (2018), Creating the Transportation System We Want: Building Blocks for the Road Ahead , 
AARP Public Policy Institute ( www.aarp.org ); at https://bit.ly/2Xg3PpN .  
 
Marowits (2017), “Self-driving Ubers Could Still be Many Y ears Away, Says Research Head,” CTV News 
(www.ctvnews.ca ); at http://bit.ly/2Dl48Y7 .  
 
Greg Marsden, Iain Docherty and Robyn Dowling  (2020), “ Parking Futures: Curbside Management in the Era 
of ‘New Mobility’ Services ,” Land Use Policy , Vol. 91 (doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.05.031 ).  
 
McKinsey (2016), Automotive Revolution  (www.mckinsey.de ); at https://bit.ly/2zYBTfG .  
 
Jeffrey Mervis (2017) , “Are We Going Too Fast on Driverless Cars? ,” Science Magazine 
(www.sciencemag.org ); at www.scie ncemag.org/news/2017/12/are -we-going -too-fast-driverless -cars.  
 
Dimitris Milakis, Bart van Arem and Bert van Wee (2017), “Policy and Society Related Implications of 
Automated Driving: A Review of Literature and Directions for Future Research,” Journal of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems , Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 324 –348; a t https://bit.ly/2zSSOgZ .   
 
Adam Millard -Ball (2016), “Pedestrians, Autonomous Vehicles, and Cities,” Journal of Planning Education 
and Research , pp. 1-7 (DOI: 10.1177/0739456X16675674); a t https://bit.ly/2hhYrxV .    
 
John S. Miller and Di Kang (2019), Ways to Consider Driverless Vehicles in Virginia Long -Range Travel 
Demand Models , Virginia Transpo rt. Res. Council  (www.virginiadot.org/vtrc ); at https://bit.ly/33C5VBM .  
 
Alexandra S. Mueller, Jessica B. Cicchino and David S. Zuby (2020), What Humanlike Errors Do Autonomous 
Vehicles Need to Avoid to Maximize Safety? , Insurance Institute for Highway Safety ( www.iihs.org ); at 
www.iihs.org/topics/bibliography/ref/2205 . 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
46 
  
Razieh N adafianshahamabadi, Mohammad Tayarani and Gregory Rowangould (2021), “A Closer Look at 
Urban Development Under the Emergence of Autonomous Vehicles, Journal of Transport Geography , Vo. 
94 (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2021.103113 ).  
 
NCHRP (2018), Impacts of Connected Vehicles and Automated Vehicles on State and Local Transportation 
Agencies , National Cooperative Highway Research Program ( http://trb.org ); at https://bit.ly/2dwWddo .   
 
NHTSA (2013), Preliminary Statement of Policy Concerning Automated Vehicles , National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration ( www.nhtsa.gov ).  
 
Peter Norton (2021), Autonorama: The Illusory Promise of High -Tech Driving , Island Press 
(https://islandpress.org ); at https://islandpress.org/books /autonorama ; reviewed by Michael Lewyn at 
www.planetizen.com/blogs/115457 -book -review -autonorama . 
 
Ashley Nunes and Kristen D. Hernandez (2020), “Autonomous Taxis & Public Health: High Cost or High 
Opportunity Cost?, Transportation Research Part A , Vo. 138, pp. 28 -36 (doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2020.05.011 ).  
 
Ashley Nunes et al. (2021), “Estimating the Energy Impact of Electric, Autonomous Taxis: Evidence from a 
Select Market ,” Environmental Research Letters  (https://doi.org/10.1088/1748 -9326/ac1bd9 ). 
 
OECD/ITF (2018), The Shared -use City: Managing the Curb , Organiza tion for Economic Cooperation and 
Development and the International Transport Forum  (www.itf -oecd.org ); at https://bit.ly/2B8hLqG .   
 
Alan Ohnsman (2014) , “Automated Cars May Boost Fuel Use, Toyota Scientist Says ,” Bloomberg Press , 16 
July 2014  (www.bloomberg.com ); at https://bloom.bg/2mDkmAu .  
 
ORNL (annual reports ), Transportation Energy Book , Oak Ridge National Lab ( www -cta.ornl.gov/data ).  
 
Enrica Papa and António Ferreira (2018), “Sustainable Accessi bility and the Implementation of Automated 
Vehicles,” Urban Science , Vo. 2 /1 (doi:10.3390/urbansci2010005 ); at https://bit.ly/2DHjZQz .  
 
PBIC (2017), Automated and Connected Vehicles, Pedestrians, and Bicyclists , Pedestrian and Bicycle 
Information Center ( www.pedbikeinfo.org ); at www.pedbikeinfo.org/AV .  
 
David Reighmuth (2020), Are Electric Vehicles Really Better for the Climate? Yes. Here’s Why , Union of 
Concerned Scientists ( https://blog.ucsusa. org); at https://bit.ly/2ZPLku3 . 
 
Caroline Rodier (2018) , Travel Effects and Associated Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Automated Vehicles , UC 
Davis Institute for Transportation Studies ( https://ncst.ucdavis.edu ); at https://bit.ly/3iJVlB5 . 
 
Shelley Row (2013), “The Future of Transportation: Connected Vehicles to Driverless Vehicles…What Does It 
Mean To Me?” ITE Journal  (www.ite.org ), Vol. 83, No. 10, pp. 24 -25. 
 
SAE (2014), Levels of Driving Automation Are Defined in New SAE International Standard J3016 , Society of 
Automotive Engineers ( www.sae.org ); at www.sae.org/misc/pdfs/automated_driving.pdf . 
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
47 
 Bruce Schaller (2017), Empty Seats, Full Streets : Fixing Manhattan's Traffic Problem , Schaller Consulting 
(http://schallerconsult.com ); at http://schallerconsult.com/rideservices/emptyseats.pdf .  
 
Susan Shaheen, Hannah  Totte and  Adam  Stocker  (2018), Future of Mobility  White Paper , ITS Berkeley; at 
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/68g2h1qv .  
 
Shared Mobility Principles for Livable Cities  (www.sharedmobilityp rinciples.org ). Principles  to guide 
decision -makers and stakeholders toward the best outcomes for new mobility options.  
 
Marc Schlossberg, et al. (2018), Rethinking the Street in an Era of Driverless Cars , Urbanism Next Research 
(www.urbanismnext.com ); at www.urbanismnext.com/s/Rethinking_Streets_AVs_012618 -27hcyr6.pdf .  
 
Brandon Schoettle and Michael Si vak (2014), A Survey Of Public Opinion About Autonomous And Self -
Driving Vehicles , Transportation Research Institute, University of Michigan  (www.umich.edu/~umtriswt ).  
 
Brandon Schoettle and Michael Sivak (20 16), Motorists' Preferences for Different Levels of Vehicle 
Automation , Transportation Research Institute, University of Michigan  (www.umich.edu/~umtriswt ).  
 
Michele D. Simoni, et al. (2019), Congestion Pricing in a World of Sel f-Driving Vehicles: An Analysis o f 
Different Strategies in Alternative Future Scenarios , TRB Annual Meeting; at  https://bit.ly/3Kn1EqS . 
 
Tom Simonite (2016), “ Prepare to be Underwhelmed by 2021’s Autonomous Cars: Ford, Uber, and BMW 
Promise Fully Self -Driving Cars in Five Years —But They Will Probably Only Work in Very Limited Areas ,” MIT 
Technology Review  (www.technologyreview.com ); at https://bit.ly/2PZxH6X .   
 
Michael Sivak  and Brandon Schoettle  (2015 a), Road Safety with Self -Driving Vehicles , Sustainable 
Worldwid e Transportation Program ( www.umich.edu/~umtri swt), University of Michigan.  
 
Michael Sivak  and Brandon Schoettle  (2015 b), Potential Impact of Self -Driving Vehicles on Household 
Vehicle Demand and Usage , Sustainable Worldwid e Transportation Program ( www.umich.edu/~umtriswt ).  
 
Michael Sivak and Brandon Schoettle (2015c), Influence of Current Nondrivers on the Amount of Travel and 
Trip Patterns with Self -Driving Vehicles , Sustainable Worldwide Transportation Program 
(www.umich.edu/~umtriswt ), University of Michigan; at  http://bit.ly/2BrEHxV .  
 
Soheil Sohrabi, Haneen Khreis and Dominique Lord (2020), “Impacts of Autonomous Vehicles on Public 
Health: A Conceptual Model an d Policy Recommendations,” Sustainable Cities and Society , Vo. 63 
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102457 ); at https://bit.ly/3fCbOWs .  
 
Jeff Speck (2017), Autonomous Vehicles , United Conference of Mayors; at  https://bit.ly/2BE9tcG .  
 
Daniel Sperling (2017), Three Revolutions: Steering Automated, Shared, and Electric Vehicles to a Better 
Future , Island Press ( https://islandpress.org ).  
 
T. Stephens, et al. (2016), Estimated Bounds and Important Factors for Fuel Use and Consumer Costs of 
Connected and Automated Vehicles, Technical Report , National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
(www.nrel.gov ); at www.nrel.gov/docs/fy17osti/67216.pdf .  
 
Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning  
Victoria Transport Policy Institute  
48 
 Araz Taeihagh and Hazel Si Min Lim (2018), “Governing Autonomous Vehicles: Emerging Responses for 
Safety , Liability, Privacy, Cybersecurity, and Industry Risks,” Transport Reviews , at https://bit.ly/2DYQaLd .  
 
Morteza Taiebat, Samuel Stolper and Ming Xu (2019), “Forecasting the Impact of Connected and 
Automated Vehicles  on Energy Use: A Microeconomic Study of Induced Travel and Energy Rebound,”  
Applied Energy , Vol. 247, pp 297 -308 ( https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.174 ).  
 
Stefan Trommer, et al. (2016), Autonomous Driving : The Impact of Vehicle Automation on Mobility 
Behaviour , Institute of Transport Research ( www.ifmo.de ); at http://bit.ly/2kIAOOQ .  
 
TRB (2017), Strategies to Advance Automated and Connected Vehicles , Transportation Research Board 
(www.trb.org ); at www.nap.edu/download/24873 . 
 
TRB (2019), Socioeconomic Impacts of Automated and Connected Vehicles , European Commission and the 
Transportation Research Board ( www.trb.org ); at www.trb.org/Publications/Blurbs/1 78576.aspx . 
 
Wharton (2017), The Road Ahead for Connected Vehicles , Wharton School of Management 
(http://wharton.upenn.edu ); at http://whr.tn/2BqKIuT .  
 
Kea Wilson (2022), Why Tesla Can Program Its Cars to Break Road Safety Laws , StreetBlog USA 
(https://usa.streetsblog.org ); at https://bit.ly/3fGTmMg .  
 
WSJ (2017), “ Why Your Next Car May Look Like  a Living Room ,” Wall Street Journal  (www.wsj.com ); at 
http://on.wsj.com/2tlCvYp .   
 
WEF (2020), Guidelines for City Mobility : Steering Towards Collaboration , World Economic Forum  
(www.weforum.org/reports/guidelines -for-city-mobility -2020 ) 
 
World Bank (2005), A Framework for the Economic Evaluation of Transport Projects  (www.worldbank.com ) ; 
at https://bit.ly/2wPF7Sg .  
 
Wenwen Zhang and Kaidi Wang (2020), “Parking Futures: Shared Automated Vehicles and Parking Demand 
Reduction Trajectories in Atlanta,” Land Use Policy , Vo. 9 1 (doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.04.024 ). 
 
David Zipper (2021), When Cities Say No to New Transportation Technology , City Lab 
(www.bloomberg.com/citylab ); https://bloom.bg/3ioMpSL .  
 
 
 
www.vtpi.org/avip.pdf  
