=== Metadata ===
{
    "file_name": "Guidelines for developing and assessing control systems for automated vehicles.pdf",
    "file_path": "/Users/mf0016/Desktop/soe_RAG/resources/Guidelines for developing and assessing control systems for automated vehicles.pdf",
    "status": "Processed"
}

=== Content ===
PAS 1880 :2020
Guidelines for developing 
and assessing control systems 
for automated vehicles

Publishing and copyright information
The BSI copyright notice displayed in this document indicates when the document was 
last issued.
© The British Standards Institution 2020. 
Published by BSI Standards Limited 2020.
ISBN 978 0 539 04031 9
ICS 43.020 
Publication history
First published April 2020
i
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Contents
Foreword  ....................................................................................................  ii
Introduction  ................................................................................................  iv
1 Scope   ........................................................................................................  1
2 Normative references  ..............................................................................  2
3 Terms and definitions  .............................................................................  3
4 Objectives  .................................................................................................  6
5 Mission  ......................................................................................................  7
6 Operational design domain (ODD)  .........................................................  8
7 Designing the AV sensor operation (AVSO)  ...........................................  9
8 Designing the AV planning operation (AVPO)  .......................................  12
9 Designing the AV control operation (AVCO)  .........................................  14
10 Designing the AV monitoring operation (AVMO)  ...............................  16
11 Safety, security and effectiveness  ........................................................  18
Annexes
Annex A (informative) – Sources of evidence  ...........................................  19
Annex B (informative) – Designing an automated vehicle unit (AVU)  .... 21
Annex C (informative) – Artificial intelligence (AI)  ..................................  24
Annex D (informative) – Autonomous machines  ......................................  25
Annex E (informative) – Related safety standards  ....................................  27
Bibliography  ................................................................................................  29
List of figures
Figure 1 – A schematic representation of a possible architecture  
for an AV control system that is compatible with the guidelines  
presented in this PAS  ..................................................................................  iv
Figure B.1 – A schematic representation of an automated road  
vehicle showing a possible AVU configuration  .........................................  21
Figure B.2 – A schematic representation of an automated pod  
vehicle showing a possible AVU configuration  .........................................  22
Figure B.3 – A schematic representation of a Category 3  
-designated architecture  .............................................................................  23
ii
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Foreword
This PAS was sponsored by the UK’s Centre for Connected and Autonomous  
Vehicles (CCAV). Its development was facilitated by BSI Standards Limited and  
it was published under licence from the British Standards Institution. It came  
into effect on 30 April 2020.
1) In preparation.
2) In preparation.Acknowledgements
Acknowledgement is given to Michael J. Pont of 
SafeTTy Systems Ltd, as the technical author, and the 
following organizations that were involved in the 
development of this PAS as members of the steering 
group:
• Adelard
• Centre for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles 
(CCAV)
• Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure 
(CPNI)
• Connected Places Catapult
• HORIBA MIRA
• Infineon Technologies AG
• J.C. Bamford Excavators Ltd (JCB)
• Nova Modus Limited
• SafeTTy Systems Ltd
• Tata Motors Limited
• Test and Verification Solutions Limited (T&VS)
• University of York
• WMG, University of Warwick
Acknowledgement is also given to the members of 
a wider review panel who were consulted in the 
development of this PAS.
Recognition is made to the Automotive Electronics 
Systems Innovation Network (AESIN) who supported 
the pre-development phase of this PAS in a series of 
industry workshop  with BSI and members of the CAV 
community.The British Standards Institution retains ownership 
and copyright of this PAS. BSI Standards Limited as the 
publisher of the PAS reserves the right to withdraw 
or amend this PAS on receipt of authoritative advice 
that it is appropriate to do so. This PAS will be 
reviewed at intervals not exceeding two years, and 
any amendments arising from the review will be 
published as an amended PAS and publicized in Update 
Standards .
This PAS is not to be regarded as a British Standard.  
It will be withdrawn upon publication of its content in, 
or as, a British Standard.
The PAS process enables a guide to be rapidly 
developed in order to fulfil an immediate need 
in industry. A PAS can be considered for further 
development as a British Standard, or constitute part 
of the UK input into the development of a European or 
International Standard.
Relationship with other publications
PAS 1880 has been developed as part of a wider 
programme sponsored by CCAV in conjunction with 
the Department for Transport (DfT), Innovate UK 
and Zenzic to develop a suite of standardization 
products to promote the safe testing and deployment 
of automated vehicles in the UK and inform wider 
international standardization activity. 
PAS 1880 is intended to be read in conjunction with:
• guidance on system safety, including PAS 1881,  
PAS 18821), PAS 18832); BS ISO 26262, IEC 61508 and  
BS EN ISO 13849-1;
• existing legislation for UK vehicles and roads.
iii
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Use of this document
As guidelines, this PAS takes the form of guidance 
and recommendations. It should not be quoted as if it 
were a specification or a code of practice and claims of 
compliance cannot be made to it. It has been assumed 
in the preparation of this PAS that the execution of its 
provisions will be entrusted to appropriately qualified 
and experienced people, for whose use it has been 
produced.
Presentational conventions
The guidance in this PAS is presented in roman (i.e. 
upright) type. Any recommendations are expressed 
in sentences in which the principal auxiliary verb is 
“should”.
Commentary, explanation and general informative 
material is presented in smaller italic type, and does not 
constitute a normative element.
Where words have alternative spellings, the preferred 
spelling of the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary is used 
(e.g. “organization” rather than “organisation”).
Contractual and legal considerations
This PAS does not purport to include all the necessary 
provisions of a contract. Users are responsible for its 
correct application.
Compliance with a PAS cannot confer immunity from 
legal obligations.
iv
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20200 Introduction
3) In preparation.
4) In preparation.Work on the document that eventually became this 
PAS began in 2017 when a lack of accepted common 
standards and working practices was identified as a 
significant impediment to UK progress in the area of 
automated vehicles (AVs) [1]. 
In order to begin to address this challenge, this PAS 
is intended to provide an initial set of guidelines for 
developers of control systems for AVs. 
One possible architecture for such a control system is 
given in Figure 1: the different elements in this diagram 
and their interconnections are explored in the body of 
this PAS.
Figure 1  – A schematic representation of a possible architecture for an AV control system that 
is compatible with the guidelines presented in this PAS
AVSO
sensorsAVPO AVCO AVSO Actuators
AVMORequest
controlled
stop Perform
emergency
stop Location,
passengers,
load,
environment
(periodic)Tactical 
directions 
(periodic)
or MRL 
directions
AVPO
statusAVSO
statusAVCO
statusThis document (along with PAS 1881, PAS 18823) and 
PAS 18834)) is intended to support developers of AVs 
during vehicle trials in which there is a human safety 
operator who is able to take control of the vehicle 
(when they are required to do so).
This PAS is also intended to be of value to developers of 
production vehicles (in which no safety operator will be 
involved).
1
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20201 Scope
This PAS provides a set of initial guidelines for 
developers of control systems for the safe, secure and 
effective deployment of automated vehicles (AVs).
This PAS covers AVs that are capable of moving 
passengers and/or goods, without human intervention, 
within defined operational design domains.
This PAS does not cover general techniques for 
achieving functional safety in AVs; instead, reference is 
made to related standards for information about such 
matters.
NOTE For further information on general techniques 
for achieving functional safety in AVs see BS ISO 26262.
This PAS does not cover off-road machinery in any 
detail. However, some of the existing standards in this 
sector are considered in Annex D.
This PAS is intended for manufacturers and developers 
of AVs, their sub-assemblies and components. 
This PAS is also of interest to organizations involved in 
trials or other test/validation activities on AVs.
2
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20202 Normative references
There are no normative references in this document.
3
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20203 Terms, definitions and abbreviations
3.1 Terms and definitions
3.1.1 artificial intelligence
theory and development of computer systems able to 
perform tasks normally requiring human intelligence, 
such as visual perception and route planning
NOTE Artificial intelligence is assumed to be an 
umbrella term that incorporates fields such as machine 
learning, expert systems, neural networks and deep 
learning.
3.1.2 automated pod vehicle (APV)
automated vehicle that does not operate primarily on 
public roads
NOTE An automated pod vehicle is distinguished by the 
fact that:
a)  it does not operate primarily on public roads (but 
might have to interact with such roads at times, e.g. 
by crossing a public road); 
b)  it is likely to be used in environments – such as 
within an airport terminal or shopping mall – in 
which it might have to interact with (for example) 
pedestrians, cyclists, scooter users, wheelchair users, 
animals and other APVs; 
c)  it has a maximum operating speed that is low 
enough to ensure that a controlled stop can be 
performed at any time (in response to a detected 
system failure) without significant risk of injury to 
any vehicle occupants or those in the vicinity of the 
vehicle; and
d)  during automated vehicle trials, it can be supported 
by a remote safety driver and/or a safety driver. 
3.1.3 automated road vehicle (ARV)
automated vehicle that operates primarily on public roads
NOTE An automated road vehicle is distinguished by 
the fact that: 
a) it operates primarily on public roads;
b) it is likely to interact with other road users, 
including AVs and HDVs, and possibly cyclists and 
pedestrians; 
c) compared with an APV, an ARV can have complex 
MRL/MRC requirements (because simply bringing 
the vehicle to a controlled stop is unlikely to be 
an appropriate response to a system failure in all 
circumstances); andd) during automated vehicle trials, it can be supported 
by a safety driver. 
3.1.4 automated vehicle (AV)
vehicle fitted with an automated driving system that 
uses both hardware and software to perform dynamic 
driving tasks associated with moving the vehicle within 
one or more defined operational design domains
NOTE An AV can be viewed as a machine. Annex C 
provides an overview of standards for machines (with a 
focus on autonomous machines).
3.1.5 automated vehicle control operation (AVCO)
function that controls the movement of an automated 
vehicle 
NOTE 1 Typically (but not necessarily) implemented 
by means of a computer program running on an 
automated vehicle unit.
NOTE 2 This can include communicating status and 
intended movement to other road users (e.g. by means 
of indicators).
3.1.6 automated vehicle monitoring operation (AVMO)
function that monitors the operation of an automated 
vehicle 
NOTE Typically (but not necessarily) implemented 
by means of a computer program running on an 
automated vehicle unit.
3.1.7 automated vehicle planning operation (AVPO)
function that performs route-planning operations for 
an automated vehicle 
NOTE Typically (but not necessarily) implemented 
by means of a computer program running on an 
automated vehicle unit.
3.1.8 automated vehicle sensing operation (AVSO)
function that performs sensing (or perception) 
operations for an automated vehicle 
NOTE Typically (but not necessarily) implemented 
by means of a computer program running on an 
automated vehicle unit.
3.1.9 automated vehicle trial (AVT)
trial of an AV in which a safety operator has 
responsibility for the safe operation of the vehicle 
4
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20203.1.10 automated vehicle unit (AVU)
form of embedded system for use in an automated 
vehicle that includes one or more microcontrollers plus 
related software (or “firmware”) 
3.1.11 controlled stop
process for bringing an automated vehicle to a halt 
as quickly as possible while minimizing the risk to the 
vehicle occupants and other road users
NOTE A controlled stop involves reducing the vehicle 
speed to zero over an interval (e.g. 5 s) that varies 
depending on the nature of the vehicle and the 
situation. During a controlled stop, the risk to (and 
caused by) any vehicle loads should be considered: for 
example, possible spillage of hazardous chemicals.
3.1.12 emergency stop
process for bringing an automated vehicle to a halt as 
quickly as possible
NOTE It is assumed that an emergency stop should 
be performed when it is not possible to perform a 
controlled stop (e.g. because of some form of system 
failure).  
3.1.13 human-driven vehicle (HDV)
A vehicle that is operated under the primary control of 
a human driver
3.1.14 minimal risk condition (MRC)
configuration in which an AV is intended to be placed 
in circumstances where it cannot complete the journey 
successfully, after it has (where possible) reached a 
minimal risk location
NOTE 1 Prior to entering an MRC, the AV is expected 
to be stationary, where possible. Entering the MRC 
then involves performing any actions that are needed 
(and possible), with a focus on reducing the risks to the 
vehicle passengers, other people in the vicinity of the 
vehicle, and animals in or in the vicinity of the vehicle. 
This might be as simple as turning on “hazard lights” 
and/or sending out some form of warning message 
and/or opening contactors in an electric vehicle to 
reduce the risk that passengers come into contact with 
a high-voltage supply.
NOTE 2 In some AVs, it might be appropriate to contact 
the relevant authorities (e.g. police) when an MRC has 
been entered.3.1.15 minimal risk location (MRL)
location that an automated vehicle attempts to move 
to from its current position in circumstances where it 
cannot complete the journey successfully
NOTE 1 The primary goal in moving to the MRL is to 
reduce the risk of injury or death to passengers in the 
AV or people or animals in the vicinity of the AV as far 
as practically possible.
NOTE 2 The choice of appropriate MRL might depend 
on the location in the ODD and the AV’s current status. 
For example, the ARV might need (if possible) to 
move to the side of the road, move away from a road 
junction or change lanes to enter the MRL. To move 
from the current vehicle location to the MRL, the AV 
follows the MRM directions. The vehicle then performs 
a controlled stop (where possible). Once it reaches 
the MRL, the vehicle then moves into a minimal risk 
condition.
3.1.16 minimal risk manoeuvre (MRM) directions
sequence of tactical directions that detail how an AV 
can move from its current location to the required MRL
3.1.17 operational design domain (ODD)
specific conditions or operating environment under 
which a given automated vehicle is designed to operate 
3.1.18 remote safety driver (RSD)
form of safety operator who performs remote 
monitoring of an AV
NOTE The RSD performs the following activities during 
automated vehicle trials of an AV: 
a)  monitoring the vehicle behaviour; and
b)  forcing the vehicle to perform a controlled stop (or 
emergency stop) in situations where it is determined 
that the vehicle is behaving in a manner which 
might lead to death or injury to the passengers in 
the AV, or to others in the vicinity of the vehicle 
(e.g. other road users, including pedestrians and 
cyclists), or to animals in the vehicle or in the vicinity 
of the vehicle, or to the road infrastructure.
The RSD is not located in the AV: instead, they have a 
remote link to the vehicle (at least a high-speed visual 
link) and an ability to trigger a controlled stop. If the 
link between the RSD and the AV is broken, this also 
triggers an immediate controlled stop. 
An RSD can be responsible for the operation of an APV 
but not for the operation of an ARV. 
5
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20203.1.19 safety driver (SD)
form of safety operator who is based in an AV
NOTE The safety driver (SD) performs the following 
activities during automated vehicle trials of an AV: 
a) monitors the vehicle behaviour; and
b) takes control of the vehicle in situations where it is 
determined that the vehicle is behaving in a manner 
which might lead to death or injury to passengers 
in the vehicle, the SD, to others in the vicinity of the 
vehicle (e.g. pedestrians, cyclists, other road users), 
or to animals in the vehicle or in the vicinity of the 
vehicle
The SD can be located in an ARV or an APV.
3.1.20 safety operator (SO)
person who is trained to supervise an AV during an 
automated vehicle trial and intervene at any time as 
required
NOTE The SO can be a safety driver or a remote safety 
driver.
3.1.21 tactical direction
low-level specification of the required next step in the 
journey of an automated vehicle 
NOTE 1 Examples include: 
• “Slow down by 1 mph and turn steering to the right 
by 1 degree”; 
• “Continue at the same speed and direction”; 
• In a given design, it might be decided that tactical 
directions are to be provided every 10 ms, so that 
at the maximum vehicle speed of 110 km/h, the AV 
will move approximately 300 mm between such 
directions. 
NOTE 2 Tactical directions are provided to the AVCO 
by the AVPO. Under normal circumstances, the AV will 
progress towards the location identified in the strategic 
directions (e.g. “Drive to Pitlochry, Scotland”), by means 
of a series of operational directions (e.g. “Take the 
next left turn into Birstall Avenue”) that will in turn be 
broken down into a series of tactical directions. 3.2 Abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
AOZ autonomous operating zone
APV automated pod vehicle 
ARV automated road vehicle 
ASAMS autonomous and semi-autonomous  
machine system
AV automated vehicle 
AVCO automated vehicle control operation 
AVMO automated vehicle monitoring operation 
AVPO  automated vehicle planning operation 
AVSO  automated vehicle sensing operation 
AVT automated vehicle trial 
AVU automated vehicle unit 
CAN controller area network  
(serial communication bus)
DL deep learning
FMEA failure modes and effects analysis 
FTA fault tree analysis
HDV human-driven vehicle 
HIL hardware in the loop
MCU microcontroller (unit)
ML machine learning
MRC minimal risk condition 
MRL minimal risk location 
MRM minimal risk manoeuvre
ODD operational design domain 
ODS object detection system
PES programmable electronic system
PTI proof test interval
RSD remote safety driver 
SD safety driver 
SIL software in the loop
SMS site management system
SO safety operator
TMR triple modular redundancy 
VA visibility aid
6
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20204 Objectives
COMMENTARY ON CLAUSE 4
This Clause summarizes the set of core objectives that 
developers of AVs are to meet in order to comply with 
this PAS.
The remaining Clauses in this document provide further 
guidance on how to meet these objectives.
Annex A provides examples of techniques that can 
be used to provide evidence of compliance with the 
objectives presented in this Clause .
The focus of this PAS is on the high-level design of 
control systems for AVs. Some suggestions about 
possible low-level design/implementation techniques 
are provided in Annex B. 
4.1 Mission
The mission of the AV is defined (see Clause  5).
4.2 Operational design domain (ODD)
The AV’s ODD (or ODDs) is:
a)  defined; and
b)  encompasses all aspects of the mission (see Clause  6).
4.3 Sensing operations
It is demonstrated that, throughout the mission, the AV:
a)  is able to determine that it is operating in 
compliance with its ODDs; and
b)  is able to provide the data required by the AV 
planning operations (see Clause  7).
4.4 Planning operations
It is demonstrated that the AV can perform all planning 
activities that are necessary in order to complete its 
mission (see Clause  8).
4.5 Control operations
It is demonstrated that the AV:
a)  is able to control its own movements during normal 
operation in order to complete its mission; and
b)  is able to take appropriate action if it determines 
that it is not operating correctly (see Clause  9).4.6 Monitoring operations
It is demonstrated that, throughout the mission, the AV 
is able to monitor its own operation (see Clause  10).
4.7 Safe, secure and effective
The AV is demonstrated to be capable of operating 
safely, securely and effectively at all times  
(see Clause  11).
7
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20205 Mission
5.1 Objective
The mission of the AV should be defined ( 4.1).
5.2 Defining the mission
The following are some example questions a 
development team should consider when drawing up  
a specification for the mission:
a)  Will the AV carry people?
b)  If people are to be carried, what will be the 
maximum number of passengers?
c)  Will the AV carry goods?
d)  If goods are to be carried, what are the 
characteristics of these goods be (e.g. weight, 
volume, hazardous materials, liquid, solid)?
e)  Will the route followed by the AV be essentially 
pre-defined (for example, something like a bus) or 
dynamic (for example, something like a taxi)?
f)  What are the configuration limits of the AV? For 
example, can the AV tow a trailer or caravan?
5.3 Evidence that objectives have  
been met
The development team should provide evidence that 
they meet the objective that is laid out in 5.1.
NOTE Annex A provides examples of techniques that 
can be used to provide this evidence.
8
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20206 Operational design domain (ODD)
5) In preparation.6.1 Objective
The AV’s operational design domain (ODD) (or ODDs) 
should:
a)  be defined; and
b)  encompass all aspects of the mission ( 4.2).
6.2 Defining the ODDs
NOTE PAS 18835) is intended to cover ODD specification.
The following are some example questions a 
development team should consider when drawing up a 
specification for the ODD:
a)  What are the geographical limits to the ODD? For 
example, can the AV operate:
1)  within 10 miles of location A?
2)  within the area marked on Map B on the 
indicated roads only?
3)  within Terminal C of Airport D?
b)  What are the interaction limits of the ODD? 
For example, can the AV interact with cyclists/
pedestrians/other AVs/HDVs? Are there limits to the 
density of traffic or pedestrians (for example) that 
the AV can handle?
c)  What kind of road features are included in the 
ODD? For example, what type of road junction? 
What about road works? What about localized 
speed restrictions?
d)  What are the incline limits to the ODD? For 
example, can the vehicle: 
1)  climb very steep hills? How steep?
2)  descend steep hills? How steep?
e)  What are the ambient temperature limits to  
the ODD?
f)  What are the humidity limits to the ODD?
g)  What are the weather limits to the ODD? Can the 
AV handle rain/hail/ice/snow? At what level (e.g. 
heavy driving rain)? What about light levels? What 
about fog? What about low sun levels? What about 
thunderstorms?
h)  What are the terrain limits to the ODD? For 
example, can the AV handle only smooth road 
surfaces?i)  Many existing road-based HDVs are essentially 
identical whether they are sold for use on desert 
roads or on snow. The driver is expected to adapt 
to the conditions (and perhaps, where necessary, 
make appropriate modifications to the vehicle, such 
as fitting winter tyres for a drive from England to 
Scotland in January). Does the ODD need to cover 
such scenarios? How many ODDs are there?
6.3 Transitioning into/out of/between 
ODDs
The focus in this PAS is on AVs (in which a human driver/
safety operator will be involved only during trials). 
If this PAS is employed in the development of a vehicle 
control system for which transitions into/out of/
between ODDs have to be supported, then evidence 
that such manoeuvres can be carried out safely, securely 
and effectively should be provided.
In circumstances where such a transition is attempted 
and fails, then the AV should enter an MRC. 
NOTE For example:
a)  entering an ODD is likely to involve a complete 
handover from a safety operator or driver to the 
AVCO;
b)  exiting an ODD is likely to involve a complete 
handover from the AVCO to a safety operator or 
driver; and
c)  transitioning between ODDs is likely to involve both 
an ODD exit and an ODD entry [as given in items 
a) and b)], with supervision from a driver or safety 
operator.
6.4 Evidence that objectives have  
been met
The development team should provide evidence that 
they meet the objective that is laid out in 6.1.
NOTE Annex A provides examples of techniques that 
can be used to provide this evidence.
9
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20207 Designing the AV sensor operation (AVSO)
7.1 Objective
It should be demonstrated that, throughout the 
mission, the AV:
a)  is able to determine that it is operating in 
compliance with its ODDs; and
b)  is able to provide the data required by the AV 
planning operations ( 4.3).
7.2 The AVSO
Meeting the objective provided in 7.1 should be 
(primarily) the responsibility of the AVSO. 
NOTE One possible architecture for an AV control 
system (showing the AVSO in context) is given in 
Figure 1.
The AVSO should:
a)  supply all sensor information required to support 
the planning operation of the AV to the AVPO  
(see Clause 8); and
b)  supply information about its own status to the AVMO.
7.3 Location
The sensor suite and related processing required to 
determine the location of the AV should be specified.
In some cases, a map reference might be appropriate, 
but the location information should be in a form (and 
with an accuracy) that is appropriate for the particular 
vehicle and given ODD.
7.4 Passengers
Where an AV is capable of transporting passengers, 
the sensor suite, and related processing, required to 
determine whether any passengers are currently in the 
vehicle should be specified.
NOTE 1 This is necessary because the required 
behaviour in the event of a system failure is likely to 
be different in a vehicle that is carrying passengers to a 
vehicle that is empty. 
NOTE 2 Variations in the number of passengers alters 
the weight of the vehicle and might therefore have 
an impact on control strategy that is followed; it 
might therefore be necessary to determine how many 
passengers are present in some AVs.NOTE 3 In many AVs, the location of any passengers in 
the vehicle (e.g. are they in a seat) and the status of 
the passengers (e.g. are they wearing a seatbelt) might 
need to be determined. 
7.5 Loads
The sensor suite and related processing required to 
determine the nature and state of any load that is 
being carried by the vehicle should be specified.
NOTE This is necessary because, for example:
a)  some loads might alter the height, width, length 
and/or weight of the vehicle: this could, in turn, 
have an impact (for example) on possible route 
options;
b)  some loads might be potentially hazardous (e.g. 
flammable or corrosive liquids). This could have an 
impact on the required vehicle behaviour in the 
event of a crash;
c)  it might be necessary for an AV to monitor the state 
of its load (such as the position of a stack of logs) in 
case material falls from the vehicle.
7.6 Environment – General
The sensor suite, and related processing required to 
identify the environment of the AV, should be specified.
As with the vehicle location, information about the 
environment should be in a form (and with an accuracy 
and timeliness) that is appropriate for the particular 
vehicle, the ODDs and the mission as it has been 
defined.
NOTE For example:
a)  An ARV on a motorway might need to identify its 
location, the lane in which it is travelling, other 
vehicles in the vicinity, pedestrians and other 
animals on the road.
b)  It might be necessary for an AV to recognize parts 
of the road infrastructure (such as traffic lights) and 
determine their state appropriately (for example, 
the traffic light is on red).
c)  The temperature outside a terminal or airport 
might be much higher or lower than an APV was 
designed for. What happens if the vehicle is moved 
into this area? Is there a risk of dangerous failure? 
Even if the AV is intended to operate over a limited 
temperature range it might need to be able to 
identify temperatures over a much wider range.
10
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20207.7 Environment – People
The sensor suite, and related processing required to 
predict the possible actions of people in the vicinity of 
the AV, should be specified.
NOTE For example:
a)  An ARV might need to predict the possible actions 
of other road users correctly by “reading the road”;
b)  An ARV or APV might need to be able to determine 
that a pedestrian ahead is looking away or visually 
impaired and might, therefore, be unaware that 
the AV is approaching. It might be considered 
appropriate to slow down and/or sound a warning 
in these circumstances.
c)  An ARV that is designed for use on motorways 
might not be expected to encounter bicycles. 
Suppose such a vehicle is activated in a city 
environment (perhaps outside a school). Is it 
clear that the vehicle can detect that it is outside 
its ODD? Does the AV need to have sensors that 
detect bicycles or people or other animals even 
if it is never expected to encounter them (so that 
it can determine that it is outside its ODD)? Are 
such “bicycle sensors”, “people sensors” or “horse 
sensors” – for example – required in all designs? 
7.8 External communication
Where it is possible to obtain relevant information 
from outside the AV (for example, from the road 
infrastructure or from other vehicles) then this should 
be considered.
Particular consideration should be given to the security 
of the AV system in these circumstances.
NOTE See PAS 11281 for information on security of the 
AV system.
7.9 Other aspects of the ODD
In addition to issues considered explicitly in this clause, 
any other sensors and related processing required to 
determine whether the AV is operating in compliance 
with its ODD specification should be specified.
In determining whether the AV is operating in 
compliance with its ODD specification, the development 
team should consider (for example) the following 
questions:
a)  What sensors are required to detect that the 
vehicle is operating in compliance with its ODD 
specification?b)  How reliable are the data upon which this 
assessment is based (can the sensor outputs be 
relied upon)?
c)  What is the lifetime of the sensors (and is this 
compatible with the mission and other AV 
requirements)?
7.10 Other planning requirements
In addition to issues considered explicitly in this clause, 
any other sensors and related processing required to 
support the planning operations (Clause 8) of the AV 
should be specified.
In doing so, the development team should consider the 
following questions:
a)  What sensors are required to support the planning 
operations?
b)  How reliable are the sensor outputs (can the sensor 
outputs be relied upon)?
c)  Have issues of sensor drift, sensor degradation 
and intermittent sensor fault been considered and 
adequately addressed?
7.11 Covering the full ODD specifications
The development team should demonstrate that the 
operation of the sensor suites addressed in this clause 
remains valid across all of the ODD specifications. 
NOTE This means when the ARV is going through 
tunnels, operating in the dark, operating at high 
temperatures, operating in rain, operating in snow, etc.
7.12 Detecting sensor failure
Safe operation of the AV (see the objective provided in 
4.7) relies upon rapid detection of sensor failure. 
If the development team cannot be confident that 
sensor failure will be detected before erroneous data 
are sent from the AVSO to the AVPO, then use of sensor 
duplication and redundancy should be considered, with 
the goal (in this case) of increasing the likelihood that 
sensor failure is detected sufficiently quickly.
This might involve the use of homogeneous or 
heterogeneous sensor redundancy (and the choice 
between these two options should be supported by 
evidence).
11
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20207.13 Sensor fault tolerance
To ensure that the AV operates effectively (see 4.7), 
additional sensor coverage should be considered, in 
order to reduce the possibility that degradation or loss 
of a single sensor would make it necessary to bring the 
vehicle to a stop.
NOTE 1 Some form of sensor-fusion algorithm might be 
appropriate to support this goal, for example:
a)  Dempster-Shafer techniques might be considered [2].
b)  Use of a form of machine-learning algorithm might 
be considered [3].
NOTE 2 See Annex C for guidance on the use of 
artificial intelligence (AI) in AVs.
7.14 Monitoring the AVSO
The AVSO should not provide sensor data to the AVPO 
in situations in which it cannot be confident that 
correct data will be provided.
To achieve this, the AVSO should perform self-
monitoring activities, to determine whether it is 
operating correctly. The results of this monitoring 
activity should be reported to the AVMO.
If, as a result of such monitoring, it is determined 
that the AV cannot continue to operate safely or 
securely and it cannot recover from this situation in an 
appropriate time, then the vehicle should perform a 
controlled stop or emergency stop.
NOTE 1 Annex D provides examples of monitoring 
techniques that have been used in autonomous 
machines.
NOTE 2 In some designs, it might be possible for the 
AVSO to generate both data and a confidence rating 
for these data. In the event that specific faults are 
identified in the AVSO, it might then still be possible 
to generate data but at a lower confidence level. Such 
“lower confidence” data might make it possible for the 
vehicle to come to a controlled stop (rather than having 
to force an immediate emergency stop).
NOTE 3 During trials (and in some cases with 
production vehicles), it might be appropriate to store 
data that are generated by the AVSO monitoring 
process for later analysis.7.15 Use of artificial intelligence (AI) in 
the AVSO
If AI is employed in the AVSO then evidence should be 
provided that this design decision is compliant with the 
objective presented in 4.7.
NOTE See Annex C for guidance on the use of AI in AVs.
7.16 Evidence that objectives have  
been met
The development team should provide evidence that 
their AVSO design meets the objectives that are laid out 
in 7.1 and the related sub-objectives that are identified 
in 7.2 to 7.15.
NOTE Annex A provides examples of techniques that 
can be used to provide this evidence.
12
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20208 Designing the AV planning operation (AVPO)
8.1 Objective
It should be demonstrated that the AV can perform 
all planning activities that are necessary in order to 
complete its mission ( 4.4).
8.2 The AVPO
Meeting the objective provided in 8.1 should be the 
responsibility of the AVPO.
NOTE One possible architecture for an AV control system 
(showing the AVPO in context) is given in Figure 1.
The AVPO should:
a)  receive all sensor information required to support 
the planning operation of the AV from the AVSO 
(see Clause 7);
b)  supply information about the next required vehicle 
movement (in the form of tactical directions or 
MRM directions) to the AVCO (see Clause 9);
c)  comply with requests from the AVMO to perform a 
controlled stop (see Clause 10); and
d)  supply information about its own status to the AVMO.
8.3 Maps and related information
When the AV is operating normally, the AVPO is likely 
to be responsible for interpreting the readings from 
one or more vehicle “surrounding sensors” (e.g. Lidar 
units) and combining this with additional information 
such as “location sensors” (e.g. GPS units) to conduct 
plausibility checks and generate the tactical directions 
to be provided to the AVCO.
A suitable form of map (or maps) should be incorporated  
in the AVPO to assist with this process, if required.
Evidence should be provided to show that any maps 
used are compatible with the mission and the ODD 
specification, are current, and of the required accuracy. 
Evidence should also be provided that appropriate 
processes are in place to deal with updates to any 
maps, and handle situations where the AV determines 
that the current map is (apparently) incorrect.8.4 Providing pre-determined route-
planning information
The AVPO might be required to provide a pre-
determined sequence of tactical directions to the AVCO 
in situations where a pre-determined route is required. 
For example, there might be some form of database 
that records the movements needed, in terms of tactical 
directions, to move from Terminal 1 to Terminal 5 in an 
airport. Limited deviations from this pre-defined route 
are to be expected: for example, if luggage is left on 
the pre-defined route, the APV might need to navigate 
around this obstacle.
NOTE To assist in this process, the following example 
questions an organization might consider are:
a) How are the required route data stored (what form 
does the database take)? 
b) How are the route data to be updated? 
c) How much deviation from the pre-defined route is 
allowed (and how will this be handled)?
The development team should provide evidence that 
the AVPO will be able to meet such requirements.
8.5 Providing dynamic route-planning 
information
The AVPO might be required to provide a highly-
dynamic sequence of tactical directions to the AVCO in 
situations where the operating environment changes 
quickly. 
For example, the AVPO might be required to operate 
rather like a “satellite navigation” unit in an HDV.
The development team should provide evidence that 
the AVPO will be able to meet any dynamic route-
planning requirements.
13
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20208.6 Providing MRM directions
The AVPO should provide MRM directions to the AVCO 
(in place of tactical directions) when notified by the 
AVMO that it is to do so.
NOTE For ARVs, one possible way of achieving this 
might be to store MRL data alongside mapping 
information for as much of the ODD as possible. 
For example, on motorways the maps could store 
information about “hard shoulder” availability from 
which MRM directions can be calculated. In areas of the 
ODD where such MRM directions cannot be provided, 
it might be considered appropriate to have the vehicle 
operate at low-speed (so that a controlled stop can be 
carried out safely in the event of a system failure).
For an APV (by definition), a controlled stop can be 
performed at any time a fault is detected. The MRM 
directions can, therefore, be summarized as “perform 
a controlled stop in the current location” (at all times) 
for such vehicles, if a better alternative cannot be 
identified for a given AV in a particular situation.
8.7 Monitoring the AVPO
The AVPO should not provide either tactical directions 
or MRM directions to the AVCO in situations in which it 
cannot be confident that correct data will be provided.
To achieve this, the AVPO should perform self-
monitoring activities, to determine whether it is 
operating correctly. The results of this monitoring 
activity should be reported to the AVMO.
If, as a result of such monitoring, it is determined 
that the AV cannot continue to operate safely or 
securely and it cannot recover from this situation in an 
appropriate time, then the vehicle should perform a 
controlled stop or emergency stop.
NOTE 1 Annex D provides examples of monitoring 
techniques that have been used in autonomous 
machines.
NOTE 2 In some designs, it might be possible for the 
AVPO to generate both data and a confidence rating 
for these data. In the event that specific faults are 
identified in the AVPO, it might then still be possible 
to generate data but at a lower confidence level. Such 
“lower confidence” data might make it possible for the 
vehicle to come to a controlled stop (rather than having 
to force an immediate emergency stop).
NOTE 3 During trials (and in some cases with 
production vehicles), it might be appropriate to store 
data that are generated by the AVPO monitoring 
process for later analysis.8.8 Use of AI in the AVPO
If AI is employed in the AVPO then evidence should be 
provided that this design decision is compliant with the 
objective presented in 4.7.
NOTE See Annex C for guidance on the use of AI in AVs.
8.9 Evidence that objectives have  
been met
The development team should provide evidence 
that their AVPO design meets the objectives that are 
provided in 8.1 and the related sub-objectives that are 
provided in 8.2 to 8.8.
NOTE Annex A provides examples of techniques that 
can be used to provide this evidence.
14
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20209 Designing the AV control operation (AVCO)
9.1 Objective
It should be demonstrated that the AV:
a)  is able to control its own movements during normal 
operation in order to complete its mission; and
b)  is able to take appropriate action if it determines 
that it is not operating correctly ( 4.5).
9.2 The AVCO
Meeting the objective provided in 9.1 should be 
primarily the responsibility of the AVCO, supported by 
the AVPO and AVMO.
NOTE One possible architecture for an AV control system 
(showing the AVCO in context) is given in Figure 1.
The AVCO should: 
a)  receive information about the next required vehicle 
movement (in the form of tactical directions or 
MRM directions) from the AVPO (see Clause 8); and
b)  supply information about its own status to the AVMO.
9.3 Movement control
The AVCO should control the vehicle actuators (e.g. 
electric drive motor, brake unit, steering unit) in order 
to implement the tactical directions or MRM directions 
it receives and/or to perform a controlled stop.
In order to demonstrate that the AV can operate safely, 
securely and effectively ( 4.7) the development team 
should be confident that the AV will be able to move to 
an MRL even in the presence of identified faults in the 
vehicle (including faults in the actuator system itself).
The development team should document how the 
AVCO meets these recommendations.9.4 Interactions and feedback
The development team should provide evidence 
that the need for the AV to interact with/provide 
feedback to other people in the vicinity of the vehicle 
has been considered during the design process, and 
that the AVCO is capable of meeting the identified 
requirements.
In any environment in which it shares with people, 
the AV should provide appropriate signals to indicate 
its intentions. In some cases, this is expected to be 
comparatively straightforward (for example, through 
use of indicator lights when changing direction or 
brake lights when slowing down).
NOTE APVs might have to share their operating 
environment with pedestrians, cyclists, other animals, 
other APVs and possibly HDVs or ARVs (e.g. if the APV 
needs to cross a public road).
ARVs might have to share their operating environment 
with HDVs, other ARVs, pedestrians, cyclists, other 
animals and possibly APVs (for the reason noted above).
Other interactions between drivers of current HDVs 
(road vehicles or pods) might involve human-to-human 
interaction. For example, a driver of a road vehicle 
might make eye contact with someone waiting at a 
pedestrian crossing; having made such contact, the 
pedestrian will know that they have been seen and will 
start to cross the road.
9.5 Use of AI in the AVCO
If AI is employed in the AVCO then evidence should be 
provided that this design decision is compliant with the 
objective presented in 4.7.
NOTE See Annex C for guidance on the use of AI in AVs.
15
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 20209.6 Monitoring the AVCO
The AVCO should not provide tactical directions to the 
actuators in situations where it cannot be confident 
that correct data will be provided.
To achieve this, the AVCO should perform self-
monitoring activities, to determine whether it is 
operating correctly. The results of this monitoring 
activity should be reported to the AVMO.
If, as a result of such monitoring, it is determined 
that the AV cannot continue to operate safely or 
securely and it cannot recover from this situation in an 
appropriate time, then the vehicle should perform a 
controlled stop or emergency stop.
NOTE 1 Annex D provides examples of monitoring 
techniques that have been used in autonomous 
machines.
NOTE 2 During trials (and in some cases with 
production vehicles), it might be appropriate to store 
data that are generated by the AVCO monitoring 
process for later analysis.
9.7 Evidence that objectives have  
been met
The development team should provide evidence that 
their AVCO design meets the objectives that are laid 
out in 9.1 and the related sub-objectives that are 
identified in 9.2 to 9.6.
NOTE Annex A provides examples of techniques that 
can be used to provide this evidence.
16
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 202010 Designing the AV monitoring operation (AVMO)
10.1 Objective
It should be demonstrated that, throughout the mission, 
the AV is able to monitor its own operation ( 4.6).
10.2 The AVMO
Meeting the objective provided in 10.1 should be 
(primarily) the responsibility of the AVMO.
NOTE One possible architecture for an AV control system 
(showing the AVMO in context) is given in Figure 1.
If the AVMO determines that:
a)  the AV is not operating in compliance with the ODD 
specification; or 
b)  the vehicle is not otherwise operating correctly; or 
c)  the AVMO is not itself operating correctly, 
then the AVMO should issue a command to the AVPO 
requiring that the vehicle perform a controlled stop. 
If the AV does not respond to this command within 
an appropriate time, then the AVMO should trigger a 
controlled stop directly (e.g. see Figure 1).
NOTE Other “recovery” behaviour might also be 
considered here. For example, suppose that the vehicle 
is intended to carry passengers but currently has no 
passengers. If a fault occurs to (say) the seat-belt 
system, this will have no impact on other road users but 
does mean that the AV cannot safely carry passengers. 
In these circumstances, performing a controlled stop 
or emergency stop might not be the most appropriate 
course of action. Instead, it might be more appropriate 
to have the vehicle travel (without passengers) to the 
nearest repair centre.10.3 Self-monitoring (high level)
The team developing the AVMO should demonstrate that:
a)  safety-related faults in the vehicle that it might 
reasonably be expected that a driver of an 
equivalent HDV could detect, can be detected by 
the AVMO and handled appropriately;
b)  safety-related faults in the AVMO can be detected 
by the AVMO and handled appropriately; and
c)  all other safety-related faults in the vehicle can be 
detected by the AVMO and handled appropriately.
Data provided by the AVSO, AVPO and AVCO (as a 
result of their self-monitoring processes) should be 
used to support the monitoring requirements that are 
identified in this clause.
NOTE 1 Detection of safety-related faults in the vehicle 
that it might reasonably be expected that a driver of 
an equivalent HDV could detect might be carried out 
directly by the AVMO. Alternatively, detection of such 
faults might be carried out by the AVSO, AVPO or AVCO 
and reported to the AVMO for handling.
NOTE 2 To assist in this process, the following examples 
of situations involving a human driver might help to 
illustrate some of the high-level fault monitoring that is 
envisaged here:
a) “On returning to my vehicle in the car park, I 
noticed that someone had run into it: I called my 
garage to check that it was still safe to drive.”
b) “There was an unusual noise coming from the front 
right wheel/wheel bearing so I pulled over to the 
side of the road.”
c) “The vehicle had started to stall when I slowed down 
to approach a junction; I was concerned that this 
was becoming dangerous and I stopped using it.”
17
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 202010.4 Self-monitoring (low level)
The AVMO should not provide “controlled stop” 
requests (or any other requests) to the AVPO in 
situations in which it cannot be confident that correct 
requests will be made.
To achieve this, the AVCO should perform self-
monitoring activities, to determine whether it is 
operating correctly. 
If, as a result of such monitoring, it is determined 
that the AV cannot continue to operate safely or 
securely and it cannot recover from this situation in an 
appropriate time, then the vehicle should perform an 
emergency stop.
NOTE 1 Annex D provides examples of monitoring 
techniques that have been used in autonomous 
machines.
NOTE 2 During trials (and in some cases with 
production vehicles), it might be appropriate to store 
data that are generated by the AVMO monitoring 
process for later analysis.
10.5 Use of AI in the AVMO
If AI is employed in the AVMO then evidence should be 
provided that this design decision is compliant with the 
objective presented in 4.7.
NOTE See Annex C for guidance on the use of AI in AVs.
10.6 Evidence that objectives have  
been met
The development team should provide evidence that 
their AVMO design meets the objectives that are laid 
out in 10.1 and the related sub-objectives that are 
identified in 10.2 to 10.5.
NOTE Annex A provides examples of techniques that 
can be used to provide this evidence.
18
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 202011 Safety, security and effectiveness
11.1 Objective
The AV should be demonstrated to be capable of 
operating safely, securely and effectively at all times ( 4.7).
11.2 General safety requirements
Four general hazards that can be identified for control 
systems in an HDV:
a)  the vehicle performs “unintended acceleration” 
(with the possible consequence – for example – 
that it runs into another vehicle or pedestrian) 
or “unintended deceleration” (with the possible 
consequence – for example – that another vehicle 
runs into it from behind);
b)  the vehicle does not accelerate or decelerate when 
it is required to do so (with similar potential for 
collisions);
c)  the vehicle performs an unplanned lateral 
movement (potentially – for example – pulling into 
the path of another vehicle); or
d)  the vehicle does not perform a lateral movement 
when it is required to do so (potentially – for 
example – running off the edge of a road).
In order to comply with the objective in 4.7, the 
development team should provide evidence that the 
AV they are developing is able to address these hazards 
effectively. 
NOTE To assist in this process, the development 
team might wish to consider that such hazards are 
addressed in a road-based HDV by the driver, who 
provides capabilities similar to the following (from an 
engineering perspective):
a) a “monitoring system” that is independent from 
vehicle control systems;
b) independent “actuator units” (to move the steering 
wheel, for example);
c) a “power supply” for the above “units” that is 
independent of the vehicle power supplies; and
d) diversity in all of the above “designs” (when 
compared with the vehicle systems).11.3 General security requirements
The ability to address the general hazards given in 11.2 
might be compromised by a cybersecurity attack on the 
AV. The development team should provide evidence 
that the AV has mechanisms in place that allow it to 
withstand such an attack.
NOTE Annex C provides information on some standards 
that might be useful.
11.4 Effective operation
Evidence should be provided by the development team 
that the AV will operate effectively.
NOTE To be effective requires that the AV can meet 
the mission requirements (see 4.1 and Clause 5). It 
is (theoretically) possible to meet both the safety 
and security concerns in the objective given in 4.7 
by creating an AV that is therefore very unlikely to 
cause injuries or death. Such an AV will, however, not 
meet the requirement given in 4.7 that the vehicle be 
effective.
11.5 The role of the safety operator
If, during trials, a safety operator is utilised then this 
should be in accordance with PAS 1881.
11.6 Evidence that objectives have  
been met
The development team should provide evidence that 
their AV design meets the objectives that are laid out in 
11.1 and the related sub-objectives that are identified 
in 11.2 to 11.5.
NOTE Annex A provides examples of techniques that 
can be used to provide this evidence.
19
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Annex A (informative)  
Sources of evidence
A.1 Overview
Annex A provides examples of techniques that can 
be used to provide evidence of compliance with the 
objectives presented in Clause 4 to Clause 11.
A.2 Processes
Documented development processes can help 
to provide evidence that (for example) a given 
design is compatible with a particular set of system 
requirements.
For users of this PAS, the processes described in  
the BSI ISO 26262 series might be an appropriate 
starting point.
A.3 Generic safety case
Safety cases are widely used across a range of domains.
For example, in the nuclear industry:
“A safety case is a logical and hierarchical set of 
documents that describes risk in terms of the hazards 
presented by the facility, site and the modes of 
operation, including potential faults and accidents, 
and those reasonably practicable measures that need 
to be implemented to prevent or minimize harm. It 
takes account of experience from the past, is written 
in the present, and sets expectations and guidance for 
the processes that should operate in the future if the 
hazards are to be controlled successfully. The safety 
case clearly sets out the trail from safety claims through 
arguments to evidence.” 
NOTE See Office For Nuclear Regulation (ONR). Safety 
Assessment Principles For Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition 
Revision 1 (January 2020) [4].
For users of this PAS, the “MISRA Guidelines for 
Automotive Safety Arguments” [5] might be an 
appropriate starting point.A.4 Hazard analysis and risk assessment
A hazard analysis and risk assessment (HARA) process 
is employed as part of various safety standards and 
guidelines.
For users of this PAS, the HARA process described in  
the BSI ISO 26262 series might be an appropriate 
starting point.
NOTE When a HARA is performed in compliance with 
BS ISO 26262, controllability “by persons involved” is to 
be determined. As there is no driver in an AV (outside 
of a trial situation), controllability involves actions by 
people in the vicinity of the vehicle only: such actions 
can be expected to be of very limited benefit in the 
majority of scenarios.
A.5 Safety of the intended function 
(SOTIF)
In addition to the hazards that can be identified 
through what might be seen as a traditional HARA 
process (see A.4), the use of complex components in an 
AV (e.g. complex sensors) means that additional hazards 
can be presented, due to limitations of the system/
system components when operating as intended (with 
no faults present). Such issues are described by the 
phrase “safety of the intended functionality” (SOTIF).
For users of this PAS, PD ISO/PAS 21448 might be an 
appropriate starting point when considering SOTIF issues. 
NOTE The AVMO might provide a means of mitigating 
some SOTIF issues in AVs that are developed in 
compliance with this PAS.
A.6 Fault-based analysis
Analysis techniques such as failure modes and effects 
analysis (FMEA) and fault-tree analysis (FTA) are useful 
in conducting a structured and comprehensive analysis 
of a system design to consider both causes of unwanted 
conditions and the effects of faults. 
20
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020A.7 STPA/STAMP
System theoretic process analysis (STPA) and system 
theoretic accident model and processes (STAMP) 
provide an alternative approach to hazard analysis.
At the heart of these processes is an assumption that 
sometimes the cause of systems failure is not that (for 
example) a component has failed to operate correctly 
but – instead – that the system design was simply 
inadequate. Note that there is some overlap here (at 
least in terms of concept) with SOTIF ( A.5).
Further information about STPA and STAMP can be 
found in Engineering a Safer World: Systems Thinking 
Applied to Safety  [6].
A.8 Hazard and operability (HAZOP) 
studies
A hazard and operability (HAZOP) study is a structured 
examination of a complex system or process that is 
carried out in identify and evaluate problems that can 
represent risks to people or equipment.
HAZOPs originated in the chemical industry. They are 
now employed more widely.
A guide by Tyler, Crawley & Preston provides further 
information [7]. See also Medoff and Faller “Functional 
Safety – An IEC 61508 SIL 3 Compliant Development 
Process” [8] and Redmill, Chudleigh & Catmur System 
Safety: HAZOP and Software HAZOP  [9].
A.9 Simulators
If simulators or similar test facilities are used to 
demonstrate compliance with any of the objectives 
detailed in this PAS, then confidence in the results 
obtained can be increased if such facilities are 
appropriately qualified. For example, a simulator 
can be developed in compliance with one or more 
international safety standards (such as BS ISO 26262). 
NOTE Simulation can include “hardware in the loop” 
(HIL) testing, “software in the loop” (SIL) testing 
and other bench tests. PAS 1881 provides further 
information.A.10 Trials
Confidence in the safe, secure and effective operation 
of an AV can be increased by recording the results  
from trials that involve a safety driver or remote  
safety driver.  
A.11 Independent assessment 
An independent assessment (by a suitably-qualified 
individual) of the evidence assembled by a 
development team to demonstrate compliance with the 
objectives presented in Clause 4 to Clause 11 can help 
to increase confidence in the conclusions reached.
21
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Annex B (informative)  
Designing an automated vehicle unit (AVU)
B.1 Overview
Throughout this PAS, the focus has been on the design 
of the AVSO, AVCO, AVPO and AVMO functions. 
In this Annex, possible ways of implementing these 
functions by means of AVUs are explored.
By default, it is assumed in this PAS that each of 
the operations (AVSO, AVCO, AVPO and AVMO) are 
implemented using a separate AVU: this is sometimes 
called a “federated architecture” (see Figure B.1 which 
provides schematic representation of an automated 
road vehicle showing a possible AVU configuration).Using a more integrated architecture (where two or 
more of these operations are implemented by means 
of a single AVU) can also be considered, provided that 
evidence can be provided that the different operations 
do not interfere with one another. Use of an integrated 
architecture might be easier to justify in an APU (see 
Figure B.2 which provides a schematic representation 
of an automated pod vehicle showing a possible AVU 
configuration).
NOTE Use of an integrated architecture might increase 
the risk of common-cause failures in a design. Provided 
that such failures can be detected by the AVMU 
(which can then trigger an emergency stop) then it 
is possible to be confident that the system based on 
an integrated architecture will operate safely – if 
(and only if) performing an emergency stop is an 
appropriate response to a system failure. In the control-
system designs considered in this PAS, performing an 
emergency stop at any time is more likely to be an 
appropriate response for an APV than it is for an ARV.
Figure B.1  – A schematic representation of an automated road vehicle showing a possible 
AVU configuration
Automated road vehicleSafety
driverAVSU
(AVSO)AVPU
(AVPO)
AVMU
(AVMO)AVCU
(AVCO)
22
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Figure B.2  – A schematic representation of an automated pod vehicle showing a possible  
AVU configuration
Automated pod vehicleSafety
driverRemote sa fety driv er
AVU
(AVSO +
AVPO +
AVCO)AVMU
(AVMO)
B.2 Self-monitoring
Each AVU is assumed to be responsible for self-monitoring, 
to ensure that the AVU is itself operating correctly.
BS ISO 26262-6, IEC 61508 and BS EN ISO 13849-1 provide 
useful guidance on the development of monitoring 
software for complex embedded systems like the AVU.
B.3 Designing the AVU architecture
Developers of AVUs can consider a technical safety 
concept in accordance with BS ISO 26262-4 to detect 
and react to faults and failures. During such a process, 
consideration of the hardware architectural metrics 
(BS ISO 26262) or hardware fault tolerance and safe 
failure fraction (IEC 61508) might suggest use of a dual-
processor architecture. 
Dual-processor designs are commonly employed 
in systems that are developed in compliance with 
IEC 61508 and BS EN ISO 13849. These standards have a 
focus on “machines” that might be required to operate 
without human intervention for long periods. For 
example, it is not uncommon for designs developed in 
compliance with IEC 61508 and/or BS EN ISO 13849-1 to 
have a proof test interval (PTI) of 10 years or more. The PTI represents the time after which the unit is either: 
a)  subject to a complete test and verification process 
to ensure that it is in an “as new” condition; or
b)  replaced. 
There might be little (or nothing) by way of 
maintenance performed during the PTI. In these 
circumstances the unit will monitor its own condition 
throughout this period and determine whether it is 
able to operate safely. If it cannot do so, it will enter an 
appropriate safe state.
In order to support comprehensive monitoring over 
long periods (potentially measured in years), and to 
provide confidence that the system is able to enter 
what is referred to in this PAS as an MRC if problems 
are detected during this monitoring process, many 
machinery designs have a hardware fault tolerance 
(HFT) of 1. HFT = 1 means that there are two processing 
paths available. In practice, this typically means that the 
hardware design is based on two microcontrollers that:
a)  can perform cross checks; and
b)  might be able to operate independently – at least 
for a limited period – if one microcontroller fails. 
23
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Such dual-processor designs are represented explicitly 
in the form of the “designated architectures” for 
safety-critical systems in BS EN ISO 13849-1 (see Figure 
B.3 which provides a schematic representation of a 
Category 3 -designated architecture that involves dual 
microcontrollers). 
Figure B.3  – A schematic representation of a Category 3 -designated architecture
Sensor 1 Actuator 1 MCU 1
Sensor 2 Actuator 2 MCU 2
NOTE SOURCE BS EN ISO 13849-1: 2015.
B.4 Multi-processor options
In some designs (particularly in ARVs) it might be 
necessary to consider triple-modular redundancy 
in the AVU in order to meet the requirements for 
effectiveness ( 4.7).
In other designs, use of multiple processors (e.g. four 
or more) might be considered, in order to meet such 
requirements.B.5 Linking AVUs together
When linking multiple AVUs in a given AV design, 
consideration is to be given to mechanisms for 
detecting and reacting to communication failures: see 
for example BS ISO 26262-6:2018 Annex D. 
Many proprietary protocols (such as CAN), while 
designed with an inherent degree of resilience, 
often need to be supplemented with additional 
error checking capabilities, e.g. periodic message 
transmission, “alive counter”, additional checksum, 
when used in such designs.
In some designs, following an industry-standard 
protocol (e.g. SAE J1939) might be appropriate.
24
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Annex C (informative)  
Artificial intelligence (AI)
C.1 Overview
Use of AI being explored in trials of AV systems (e.g. see 
Salay, R. et al. “An Analysis of ISO 26262: Using Machine 
Learning Safely in Automotive Software” [10]).
Use of AI techniques in AVs is considered in this Annex.
C.2 Should AI be avoided in AVs?
The core challenge with any form of AI application (as 
far as current safety standards are concerned) lies in the 
learning element. As the system learns, the traceability 
(between requirements, design and implementation) 
that lies at the heart of such standards is difficult (or 
impossible) to demonstrate with the level of confidence 
that would be expected in current safety-critical design 
processes.
As a consequence, it is perhaps not surprising that 
international safety standard IEC 61508 suggests that 
use of AI is not recommended in systems of “SIL 2”,  
“SIL 3” or “SIL 4” (see IEC 61508-3:2010, Annex A,  
Table A.2)].
Similarly, according to Aravantinos, V. and Diehl [11], p.1:
“The success of deep learning (DL), in particular in 
computer vision, makes its usage more and more 
tempting in many applications, including safety-
critical ones. However, the development of such 
applications must follow standards … which typically 
do not envision the usage of machine learning. At the 
moment, practitioners therefore cannot use machine 
learning for safety-critical functions (e.g., ASIL-D for  
ISO 26262, or DAL-A for DO178).”C.3 If AI is to be used in AVs, how can the 
risks be reduced?
If AI is to be used in AVs, the risks of doing so can only 
be reduced by understanding why traditional standards 
express concerns about the use of such technology and 
exploring ways of addressing these concerns.
PD ISO/PAS 21448:2019 (particularly Annex G) discusses 
the use of AI in the context of AVs.
The following papers also provide further information 
on the use of AI in the context of AVs: Salay, R. et al 
[10], Aravantinos, V. and Diehl, F. (2019) “Traceability 
of Deep Neural Networks” [11], Salay, R. and Czarnecki, 
K. “Using Machine Learning Safely in Automotive 
Software: An Assessment and Adaption of Software 
Process Requirements in ISO 26262” [12] and Ashmore, 
Calinescu and Paterson (2019) “Assuring the Machine 
Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and 
Challenges” [13].
25
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Annex D (informative)  
Autonomous machines
D.1 Overview 
This Annex provides an illustrative relationship of the 
use of AVs in an earthmoving/mining context and 
some of the related standards that apply or are under 
development.
D.2 The ODD description
A construction, earthmoving or mining site typically 
has restricted public access and defined “operational 
zone” (which are similar to the concept of ODDs 
that is presented in this PAS). As the site evolves the 
operational zones might change significantly.
Automated machine operation can additionally have 
physically defined or geo-fenced operational zone (a 
defined ODD) under site management systems (SMS) 
coordination. SMS are typically manned control rooms 
and so can be equated to the “remote safety driver” 
(RSD) concept within this PAS. 
In addition to the SMS monitoring capability and 
machine telemetry, drones can also be utilized for over 
the horizon and real-time data collection/feedback 
to the SMS. The SMS task schedulers can define the 
machines mission and highly automated machines can 
provide pre-determined route planning, with dynamic 
route-planning based upon the localized conditions 
and machine detection and operational capabilities and 
SMS updates.
Conditions within the operational zones might be 
environmentally arduous when compared with those 
experienced by typical on-highway vehicles. 
The machines operating on such sites might be 
considerably larger than on-highway vehicles. Some 
might have multi-axis movement. Typically a machine is 
designed for a specific task, but – through the addition 
of attachments – can perform different tasks. 
Machine telemetry can provide current health and 
productivity data which is typically used to improve 
operational efficiency. If a machine experiences 
health issues it might be stood down to a minimal risk 
condition, operate in a reduced capacity, or move to 
a defined service area/location away from its original 
intended task (the equivalent of an MRL in this PAS).Some machines have automated features such as 
adaptive cruise control and collision avoidance 
warnings. The machines are used to extract/move 
material with automation supplementing base machine 
functionality with systems such as auto dig, auto 
compaction and auto grade. For some features the 
machine operational kinematics are augmented by 
the desired topological design data, uploaded to the 
machines either over the air or manually. 
Where automated functions are used, these might be 
operator selected and monitored. The operator might 
also initially “teach” and/or monitor the expected 
operation of the machine during its defined task. If 
such trials proved successful, repeatable tasks might 
then become fully automated. 
In this context, the AVCO, AVMO, AVPO and AVSO 
functionality presented in this PAS become elements of 
an autonomous or semi-autonomous machine system 
(ASAMS). The ASAMS can then collectively determine 
the most effective way of performing the desired task 
(mission) in an applicable machine mode. 
If multiple machines are assigned the same mission 
then either the on board, or remote SMS might 
collaboratively decide the order of operations to 
complete the desired task.
D.3 BS ISO 17757:2017, Autonomous and 
semi-autonomous machine system safety
BS ISO 17757:2017 provides safety requirements for 
autonomous machines and semi-autonomous machines 
used in earth-moving and mining operations, and 
their autonomous or semi-autonomous machine 
systems (ASAMS). It specifies safety criteria both 
for the machines and their associated systems and 
infrastructure, including hardware and software, 
and provides guidance on safe use in their defined 
functional environments during the machine and 
system life cycle. It also defines terms and definitions 
related to ASAMS. Many of its provisions can be applied 
to other types of autonomous or semi-autonomous 
machines.
26
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020D.4 ISO 15998:2008, Machine control 
system using electronic components – 
Functional safety requirements 
Microprocessor-based systems, generically referred 
to as programmable electronic systems (PES), are at 
present being used in machines to perform non-safety-
related and, increasingly, safety-related functions. 
Safety is typically achieved by a number of protective 
systems which might rely on various technologies (e.g. 
mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, electrical, electronic, 
programmable electronic). The safety strategy considers 
not only all the elements within an individual system, 
such as sensors, controlling devices and actuators, but 
also all of the safety-related system parts. The second 
part of ISO 15998:2008 defines the envisaged functional 
safety requirements for the applicable machine type 
and typical operation. 
D.5 BS EN ISO 16001:2017, Earthmoving 
machinery  – Object detection systems 
and visibility aids – Performance 
requirements and tests
BS EN ISO 16001:2017 provides guidance for visual aids 
test procedures and sets criteria for the development of 
object detection systems (ODSs) and visibility aids (VAs) 
which indicate to the operator the presence of objects 
which are within the detection zone of such systems as 
fitted to the machines that might be found in similar 
environments.
D.6 ISO/CD TS 21815, Collision warning 
and avoidance6)
Earthmoving machinery has seen increasing use of 
detection system and avoidance technology to support 
the operators to safely operate machines. ISO/CD TS 
21815 is intended to be a multi-part standard under 
development resulting from application demands 
to set standards for machines and systems capable 
of detecting, alerting and intervening machinery 
operation, hopefully mitigating the risks presented. It 
describes hazard awareness, risk areas detection and 
envisaged behaviours in relation to a typical human 
response that are expected to be performed by the 
machine control systems in a multi-axis domain.
6) In preparation.D.7 PD ISO/TS 15143, Worksite data 
exchange
Information and measuring technology are being used 
to develop worksite information systems to support 
the control of the finished form of work performed 
by machinery used within a job site. PD ISO 15143 is 
a multi-part standard provides a mechanism for data 
to be easily and reliably exchanged between the site’s 
machinery, measuring equipment and site information 
systems. Automated functions are increasing 
being rationalized with common terms to permit 
interoperability between different vendors.
27
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Annex E (informative)  
Related safety standards
7) In preparation.
8) In preparation.E.1 Overview
Annex E provides a list of standards that might be of 
interest to readers of this PAS.
E.2 BS ISO 26262:2018
BS ISO 26262:2018 does not cover general techniques 
for achieving functional safety in AVs; instead, 
reference is made to related standards for information 
about such matters.
Now in its second edition, BS ISO 26262:2018 was 
adapted from the IEC 61508 series of standards to 
address the sector-specific needs of electrical and/
or electronic systems within road vehicles. BS ISO 
26262:2018 applies to all activities during the safety 
lifecycle of safety-related systems comprised of 
electrical, electronic and software components.
E.3 IEC 61508:2010 and  
BS EN ISO 13849-1:2015 
IEC 61508:2010 and BS EN ISO 13849-1:2015 also provide 
guidance on achieving functional safety that might be 
relevant to developers of AVs (see also Annex B).
Unlike BS ISO 26262 (which has a focus on vehicles in 
which there is a driver present at all times), IEC 61508 
and BS EN ISO 13849 have a focus on “machines” 
that might be required to operate without human 
intervention for long periods. 
E.4 BS ISO 17757:2017
BS ISO 17757:2017 provides safety requirements for 
autonomous machines and semi-autonomous machines 
used in earth-moving and mining operations, and 
their autonomous or semi-autonomous machine 
systems (ASAMS). It specifies safety criteria both 
for the machines and their associated systems and 
infrastructure, including hardware and software, 
and provides guidance on safe use in their defined 
functional environments during the machine and 
system life cycle. It also defines terms and definitions 
related to ASAMS.It is applicable to autonomous and semi-autonomous 
versions of the earth-moving machinery (EMM) defined 
in BS ISO 6165 and of mobile mining machines used 
in either surface or underground applications. Its 
principles and many of its provisions can be applied 
to other types of autonomous or semi-autonomous 
machines used on the worksites.
E.5 ISO 19014: 2018
ISO 19014:2018 provides a methodology for the 
determination of performance levels required for earth 
moving machinery, as defined in BS ISO 6165.
E.6 PD ISO/PAS 21448:2019
PD ISO/PAS 21448:2019 is intended to be applied 
to systems in which proper situational awareness is 
critical to safety, and where that situational awareness 
is derived from complex sensors and processing 
algorithms; especially emergency intervention systems 
(e.g. emergency braking systems) and advanced driver 
assistance systems (ADAS) with levels 1 and 2 on the SAE 
standard J3016 automation scales. PD ISO/PAS 21448:2019 
can be considered for higher levels of automation, 
however additional measures might be necessary.
E.7 PAS 1881:2020
This PAS covers assuring safety in AV trials and testing.
E.8 PAS 18827)
This PAS is intended to cover data collection, storage 
and accessibility of data AV trials and testing.
E.7 PAS 18838)
This PAS is intended to cover ODD specification.
E.8 SAE J3016_201806 
SAE J3016_201806 contains potentially useful 
definitions; although note that “levels” defined in SAE 
J3016 are not used in this PAS. 
28
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020E.9 PAS 11281:2018
PAS 11281:2018 gives recommendations for managing 
security risks that might lead to a compromise of safety 
in a connected automotive ecosystem. 
E.10 PAS 1885:2018
PAS 1885:2018 covers fundamental principles of 
automotive cyber security.
E.11 J3061_201601
J3061_201601 provides guidance on vehicle 
cybersecurity and was created based on existing 
practices which are being implemented or reported in 
industry, government and conference papers.
E.12 ISO/SAE CD 214349)
This standard is intended to have a focus on 
cybersecurity for road vehicles.
9) In preparation.
29
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Bibliography
10) In preparation.
11) In preparation.
12) In preparation.
13) In preparation.Standards publications
PAS 1881:2020, Assuring the safety of automated 
vehicle trials and testing – Specification
PAS 1882, Automated vehicle trials – Data collection, 
storage and accessibility – Specification10)
PAS 1883, Operational design domain (ODD) taxonomy 
for an automated driving system (ADS) – Specification11)
PAS 1885: 2018, The fundamental principles of 
automotive cyber security – Specification
PAS 11281:2018, Connected automotive ecosystems – 
Impact of security on safety – Code of practice
IEC 61508:2010, Functional safety of electrical/
electronic/programmable electronic safety-related 
systems
IEC 61508-7:2010, Functional safety of electrical/
electronic/programmable electronic safety-related 
systems: Overview of techniques and measures
PD ISO/PAS 21448:2019, Road vehicles — Safety of the 
intended functionality
PD ISO/TS  15143, Worksite data exchange
ISO/CD TS 21815, Collision warning and avoidance12)
ISO/SAE CD 21434, Road Vehicles – Cybersecurity 
engineering13)
ISO/WD 23724, Remote stop function for autonomous 
machinesISO 15998:2008, Machine control system using 
electronic components – functional safety requirements 
BS ISO 17757:2017 Autonomous and semi-autonomous 
machine system safety
BS ISO 26262:2018, Road vehicles – Functional safety
BS ISO 26262-4:2018, Road vehicles – Functional safety – 
Product development at the system level
BS ISO 26262-6:2018, Road vehicles – Functional safety  
– Product development at the software level
BS EN ISO 6165: 2012, Earth-moving machinery – Basic 
types – Identification and terms and definitions
BS EN ISO 13849-1: 2015, Safety of machinery – Safety-
related parts of control systems – General principles for 
design
BS EN ISO 16001:2017, Earth moving machinery  – Object 
detection systems and visibility aids – Performance 
requirements and tests
DO-178C, Software considerations in airborne systems 
and equipment certification
SAE J1939_201808, Serial control and communications 
heavy duty vehicle network
SAE J3016_201806, Taxonomy and definitions for terms 
related to driving automation systems for on-road 
motor vehicles
SAE J3061_201601, Cybersecurity Guidebook for Cyber-
Physical Vehicle Systems.
30
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020Other publications
[1] BRITISH STANDARDS INSTITUTION/TRANSPORT 
SYSTEMS CATAPULT. “Connected and autonomous 
vehicles: A UK standards strategy”. Published: London, 
2017.
[2] SHAFER, G. A Mathematical Theory of Evidence , 
Princeton University Press. Published: 1976.
[3] RUMELHART, D. and MCCLELLAND, J.L. “Parallel 
Distributed Processing” , Volume 1. M.I.T. Press. 
Published: 1986.
[4] OFFICE FOR NUCLEAR REGULATION (ONR). Safety 
Assessment Principles For Nuclear Facilities. 2014 Edition 
Revision 1 . Published: 2020. http://www.onr.org.uk/saps/
saps2014.pdf  [Accessed March 2020].
[5] MISRA. Guidelines for Automotive Safety 
Arguments . Published: 2019.
[6] LEVESON, N.G. Engineering a Safer World: Systems 
Thinking Applied to Safety . MIT Press. Published: 2017.
[7] TYLER, B., CRAWLEY, F. and PRESTON, M. HAZOP: 
Guide to Best Practice  (3rd edition) Institution of 
Chemical Engineers/Elsevier. Published: 2015.
[8] MEDOFF, M.D. and FALLER, R.I. Functional Safety – 
An IEC 61508 SIL 3 Compliant Development Process   
(3rd edition). Exida. Published: 2014. 
[9] REDMILL, F. CHUDLEIGH, M. and CATMUR, J.  
System Safety: HAZOP and Software HAZOP . Wiley. 
Published: 1999.
[10] SALAY, R. QUIEROZ, R. and CZARNECKI, K. (2017) 
“An Analysis of ISO 26262: Using Machine Learning 
Safely in Automotive Software”, arXiv:1709.02435v1 
[cs.AI]. Published: 2017. Available at: https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1709.02435.pdf  [Accessed March 2020].
[11] ARAVANTINOS, V. and DIEHL, F. (2019) “Traceability 
of Deep Neural Networks”, arXiv:1812.06744v2  
[cs.LG]. Published: 2019. Available at: https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1812.06744.pdf  [Accessed March 2020].[12] SALAY, R. and CZARNECKI, K. “Using Machine 
Learning Safely in Automotive Software: An Assessment 
and Adaption of Software Process Requirements in 
ISO 26262” arXiv:1808.01614v1 [cs.LG]. Published: 
2018. Available at: https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/
papers/1808/1808.01614.pdf  [Accessed March 2020].
[13] ASHMORE, R. CALINESCU, R. and PATERSON, 
C. (2019) “Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: 
Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges.  
arXiv:1905.04223 [cs.LG). Published: 2019. Available at: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.04223  [Accessed March 2020].
British Standards Institution (BSI)
BSI is the national body responsible for preparing British Standards and other 
standards-related publications, information and services.
BSI is incorporated by Royal Charter. British Standards and other standardization 
products are published by BSI Standards Limited.
About us
We bring together business, industry, government, 
consumers, innovators and others to shape their combined 
experience and expertise into standards-based solutions.
The knowledge embodied in our standards has been 
carefully assembled in a dependable format and refined 
through our open consultation process. Organizations of 
all sizes and across all sectors choose standards to help 
them achieve their goals.
Information on standards
We can provide you with the knowledge that your 
organization needs to succeed. Find out more about 
British Standards by visiting our website at bsigroup.com/
standards or contacting our Customer Services team or 
Knowledge Centre.
Buying standards
You can buy and download PDF versions of BSI 
publications, including British and adopted European and 
international standards, through our website at bsigroup.
com/shop, where hard copies can also be purchased.
If you need international and foreign standards from other 
Standards Development Organizations, hard copies can be 
ordered from our Customer Services team.
Subscriptions
Our range of subscription services are designed to make 
using standards easier for you. For further information 
on our subscription products go to bsigroup.com/
subscriptions.
With British Standards Online (BSOL)  you’ll have instant 
access to over 55,000 British and adopted European and 
international standards from your desktop. It’s available 
24/7 and is refreshed daily so you’ll always be up to date.
You can keep in touch with standards developments and 
receive substantial discounts on the purchase price of 
standards, both in single copy and subscription format,  
by becoming a BSI Subscribing Member .
PLUS  is an updating service exclusive to BSI Subscribing 
Members. You will automatically receive the latest hard 
copy of your standards when they’re revised or replaced.
To find out more about becoming a BSI Subscribing 
Member and the benefits of membership, please visit 
bsigroup.com/shop.With a Multi-User Network Licence (MUNL)  you are able to 
host standards publications on your intranet. Licences can 
cover as few or as many users as you wish. With updates 
supplied as soon as they’re available, you can be sure your 
documentation is current. For further information, email 
cservices@bsigroup.com.
Revisions
Our British Standards and other publications are updated 
by amendment or revision.
We continually improve the quality of our products and 
services to benefit your business. If you find an inaccuracy or 
ambiguity within a British Standard or other BSI publication 
please inform the Knowledge Centre.
Copyright
All the data, software and documentation set out in 
all British Standards and other BSI publications are the 
property of and copyrighted by BSI, or some person or 
entity that owns copyright in the information used (such  
as the international standardization bodies) and has 
formally licensed such information to BSI for commercial 
publication and use. Except as permitted under the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 no extract may 
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means – electronic, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise – without prior written permission 
from BSI. Details and advice can be obtained from the 
Copyright & Licensing Department.
Useful Contacts:
Customer Relations  
Tel: +44 345 086 9001  
Email: cservices@bsigroup.com
Subscription Support  
Tel: +44 345 086 9001  
Email: subscription.support@bsigroup.com
Knowledge Centre  
Tel: +44 20 8996 7004  
Email:  knowledgecentre@bsigroup.com
Copyright & Licensing  
Tel: +44 20 8996 7070  
Email:  copyright@bsigroup.com
32
PAS 1880: 2020
© The British Standards Institution 2020This page is deliberately left blank.

 BSI, 389 Chiswick High Road
London W4 4AL
United Kingdom
www.bsigroup.com

