=== Metadata ===
{
    "file_name": "On_a_Fully_Self-Organizing_Vehicle_Platooning_Supported_by_Cloud_Computing.pdf",
    "file_path": "/Users/mf0016/Desktop/soe_RAG/resources/On_a_Fully_Self-Organizing_Vehicle_Platooning_Supported_by_Cloud_Computing.pdf",
    "status": "Processed"
}

=== Content ===
On a fully self-organizing vehicle platooning 
supported by cloud computing
Umberto Montanaro1, Saber Fallah1, Mehrdad Dianati2, David Oxtoby3, Tom Mizutani3, Alexandros Mouzakitis3
1Connected and Autonomous Vehicle Lab Department of Mechanical Engineering University of Surrey
Guildford, UK, GU2 7XH
Email: s.fallah@surrey.ac.uk
2WMG, International Manufacturing Centre University of Warwick
Coventry, UK, CV4 7AL
3Jaguar Land Rover Limited Coventry, UK, CV3 4LF
Abstract —Vehicle platooning is a promising cooperative driv-
ing vision to mitigate issues in road transportation and it lever-
ages on the use of distributed control systems to precisely control
each vehicle in the ﬂeet. This paper investigates a fully adaptive
platoon control solution made possible by the advent of more
reliable communication channels and off-board cloud computing
systems. The components of the platoon control system, i.e.,
the platoon network topology and the distributed controllers,
adapt based on the relative motion of the vehicles in the
ﬂeet, thus allowing the platoon to self-organise the interactions
among the platoon members and the control gains to create
and maintain the cooperative platoon motion. Furthermore, the
adaptive mechanism to adjust the control gains is equipped with a
-modiﬁcation strategy to keep the control gains bounded in any
working condition. Numerical results show the effectiveness of
control method to make a heterogeneous platoon a self-organising
network of intelligent vehicles, while also reducing the number
of the communication links required to establish the cooperative
motion.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A vehicle platoon is a group of two or more consecutive
Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CA Vs) travelling at the
same velocity of the platoon leader (usually the ﬁrst vehicle in
the ﬂeet) with a short inter-vehicular distance. Platooning of
vehicles can offer beneﬁts such as safety, efﬁcient road usage,
reduction of the fuel consumption for the platoon followers
(vehicles in the platoon other than the leader) and passenger
comfort [1]. To guarantee the cooperative platoon motion,
cooperative adaptive cruise control (CACC) algorithms based
on the use of Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication sys-
tems are commonly exploited [2]. The effectiveness of CACC
solutions to maintain platoon formation depends on (i)the
distributed controller which deﬁnes how each vehicle uses
the information gathered through the communication chan-
nels for computing the control action and (ii)the platoon
network topology, that deﬁnes the pattern in which vehicles
are connected via wireless communications [2]. It is noted
that the technical literature provides several examples showing
that platoon topologies which allow vehicles to obtain and
use information from a multitude of vehicles in the ﬂeet
can considerably improve the performance of CACC systems.
For instance, by augmenting the information available toeach follower with the information of the leader and/or with
information of a subset of followers beyond the line-of-sight
of the onboard sensors, it is possible to (i)attenuate the effect
of disturbances on the platoon when propagated downstream
(string stability) despite the presence of communication la-
tencies [3]; (ii)increase the platoon length (i.e., number of
followers in the platoon) while preventing and unbounded drift
of the closed-loop settling time [4] and (iii)adjust the speed of
the platoon to the vehicle with a limited velocity capability [5].
The importance of the topology for the design of the control
gains to achieve closed-loop stability and the cooperative
platoon motion has been recently pointed out also in [5],
[6], [7]. Furthermore, in accordance with [7], it is beneﬁcial
to increase the connectivity among the platoon vehicles as
the communication among the followers help to regulate the
local behaviour, thus increasing safety, while communication
between followers and the leader is used to give a preview
information of reference trajectory to the followers (the desired
platoon behaviour), thus improving the establishment of the
cooperative motion.
Usually, platoon control solutions available in the literature
leverage on the use of V2V environments based on the
IEEE 802.11p protocol and for the platoon control design the
topology is assumed to be ﬁxed. The robustness of the closed-
loop system is then studied with respect to communication
imperfections such as latency [3], packet-losses [8] or commu-
nication loss [9]. It is noted that some network communication
failures and recoveries can be modelled as instantaneous and
uncontrolled switches among platoon topologies, thus switch-
ing topologies are considered in the current platoon literature
as disturbances for the platoon control system which should
remain stable with respect to these sudden and undesired
changes in the topology [10], [11].
With the performance improvements promised by the 5th
generation cellular networks (5G) [12], [13], it is expected that
a notable reduction in the communication latency and network
failures will beneﬁt CA Vs applications and vehicle platoons.
Hence, several advanced platoon strategies based on an ideal
network have been recently presented (see for instance [4],
[6], [14]). In conjunction with a more reliable communication
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
978-1-5386-9585-2/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
295
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
network, CA Vs can beneﬁt from Mobile Edge Computing
(MEC) platforms [15]. MEC servers can be installed at Road
Side Units (RSUs) or cell sites for reducing round-trip-time
and they can be used to (i)collect data from vehicles and the
roadside sensors, and (ii)analyse and process the collected
data and then propagate the results as latency-sensitive mes-
sages to CA Vs in the covered areas by leveraging on 5G’s
low-latency communications [16]. These messages can then
be used by onboard vehicle systems for implementing CA Vs
functionalities, such as vehicle platooning. The possibility
of using 5G communication together with MEC systems is
currently investigated for instance within the CARMA (Cloud-
Assisted Real-time Methods for Autonomy) project [17]. The
joint use of 5G together with MEC servers might provide a
solution that can open the way to novel approaches for con-
trolling platoons where also the network topology is a control
parameter which can be adjusted or better adapted in real-time
with respect to the dynamics of the vehicle in the platoon, thus
allowing the platoon to self-organise the interactions among
its members to achieve the common motion. However, to
the best of the authors’ knowledge, the use of an evolving
network topology for controlling vehicle platoon has only
been marginally investigated in the platoon literature. Thus,
this paper proposes the use of a platoon control with adaptive
topology and discuss how the CARMA framework can support
platoons with evolving topologies. It is noted that when the
platoon topology is an additional parameter for the control
design, new challenges arise. These challenges include (i)the
selection of control gains to guarantee the cooperative platoon
motion and (ii)the need to maintain the platoon operation
while reducing the number of links of the topology with the
aim to reduce the communication network load. As proven in
[4], the topology affects the range of control gains that guar-
antee closed-loop platoon stability. Hence, when the topology
is an additional degree of freedom, the design of its dynamics
must be carried out jointly with the gains of the distributed
controller. Moreover, even though MEC servers installed at
RSUs have the potential to support platoons operated with
the all-to-all topology (i.e., the topology where each follower
obtains information from all the followers and the platoon
leader), there is the need to reduce the network load with
the aim of avoiding network congestion and reduction of the
network performance (reduction of the throughput, an increase
in the latency, etc.). The reduction of network load is especially
needed when the number of CA Vs that require services in the
coverage area increases [18]. Hence, topologies with a reduced
number of arcs are preferable.
In this paper, the control of platoons with network topolo-
gies adapted online based on the states of the platoon vehicles
and the current driving condition is investigated. Furthermore,
the control strategy is completed with an adaptive mechanism
to adjust also the gains of a distributed linear controller as
a function of the mismatches among the state of the platoon
members, thus making the platoon system able to self-organise
jointly the network topology and the control gains (i.e., fully
adaptive platoon solution). To this aim, the platoon problemis recast as a synchronisation problem of a network of agents
as in [4], and the theory of self-organising complex networks
presented in [19] is used for the control design. It is noted that
the use of adaptive networks can also add robustness to the
closed-loop system with respect to parameter mismatches and
unmodeled dynamics. However, as the coupling strengths for
the diffusive network protocol in [19] are adapted based on the
integral of positive functions of the errors among the coupled
nodes, they might diverge in the case perfect synchronisation
is not achieved (e.g., due to unknown dynamics and persistent
external disturbances, such as nonlinear aerodynamic forces
and variations in the road-slope and road conditions) as there
is not a mechanism to prevent their unbounded growth. In
this paper, the growth of the adaptive gains is bounded by
equipping the adaptive law with -modiﬁcation strategies
similar to that exploited in [20] to bound the gains of the
adaptive solution in [21] for not-networked systems. To the
best of the authors’ knowledge, -modiﬁcation techniques
have been yet used neither for the adaptive control of complex
networks nor for platoon control.
The paper is organised as follows. Section II presents
the platoon control problem and its modelling as a network
synchronisation. Section III describes in detail the platoon
control action while in Section IV it is discussed how the
CARMA framework and the platoon architecture recently
published in [22] can support this control solution. The ability
of a set of vehicles with different parameters (heterogeneous
platoon) to self-organise to form and maintain the cooperative
platoon motion is shown in Section V. Finally, conclusions
are drawn in Section VI.
II. P LATOON MODELLING AND CONTROL OBJECTIVE
The control of a platoon of vehicles can be considered as a
synchronization problem of a network of dynamical systems
with a pinner node [2], [4], i.e., a set of multi-agent systems
interacting over a network structure and controlled such that
the dynamics of the nodes converge towards the trajectory
of the pinner node (i.e., the leader dynamics for the platoon
[23]). The key components of networked dynamical systems
are(i)the individual dynamics of the node, which describe the
evolution of each node when not coupled with the network; (ii)
the network topology for describing the interconnection among
the nodes; and (iii) the coupling protocol, i.e., the control
action for each node to steer the node dynamics towards the
pinner’s trajectory. This section is devoted to formulating the
platoon control objectives and to model the network topology
as in [4] and the vehicle dynamics which represent the node
dynamics. The control action, i.e., the network protocol, is
described in detail in Section III.
A. Modelling of the platoon network topology
The network topology for Nfollowers is represented by
a graph described as a pair GN= (VN;EN)whereVN=
f1;2;:::Ngis the set of nodes or vertices of the network and
ENVNVNis the set of edges or arcs of the network.
It is noted that when the pair (j;i)2EN, theni-th vehicle
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
296
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
receives information from the j-th vehicle. Based on EN, it
is possible to deﬁne the adjacency matrix AN2RNN,
such that its generic entry eaij= 1,(j;i)2ENotherwise
eaij= 0, or equivalently, eaij= 1 wheni-th vehicle receives
information from the j-th vehicle. It is assumed that eaii= 0
(i.e., self-edges are not allowed). To consider communications
also with the leader, the graph GNis augmented with the node
zero which also represents the pinner of the network and the
leader of the platoon, thus obtaining GN+1= (VN+1;EN+1),
whereVN+1=f0;1;2;:::;NgandEN+1VN+1VN+1.
The corresponding adjacency matrix AN+12RN+1N+1is
such thatea0j= 0,j= 0; 1;2;:::;N (i.e., it is assumed
that followers do not send information to the leader). It is
noted thateai0= 1,i = 1;:::;N , if thei-th follower receives
information from the leader, zero otherwise. For the node i,
i= 1;:::;N ,Nidenotes its neighbour set in GN+1(i.e.,
Ni=fj2f0;1:::Ng:eaij= 1g).
B. Longitudinal vehicle dynamics
For vehicle platooning only the longitudinal vehicle dynam-
ics are often considered and a satisfactory trade-off between
model accuracy and simplicity is provided by third-order linear
models [2]. Hence, the model for the i-th vehicle is
_si=vi;_vi=ai;_ai= 1
iai+1
iui; (1)
wheresi,vi,ai,uiandiare the position, velocity, accelera-
tion, control action (the desired vehicle acceleration), and the
time-lag, respectively, where i= 0 denotes the platoon leader
whilei= 1:::N denotes the i-th follower. Furthermore,
the time-lag iin (1) is used to systematically consider the
time-lag in the powertrain. Notice that, as noted in [24], this
parameter is affected by large uncertainties. Hence, in this
paper, it is assumed that iis unknown and different for each
vehicle (i.e., heterogeneous platoons are considered).
C. Platoon control Objectives
The platoon control objective is twofold: (i)impose the
velocity of the platoon leader to all followers and (ii)regulate
the inter-vehicular distance between two consecutive vehicles
in accordance with a given spacing policy [4]. By denoting
di 1;ias the desired inter-vehicular distance between the i-th
vehicle and its predecessor, the platoon control aim is to ﬁnd
uiin (1),i= 1;2;:::N , such that
lim
t!+1kvi v0k= 0 (2a)
lim
t!+1ksi 1 si di 1;ik= 0; i = 1;2;:::N; (2b)
when the platoon leader is traveling in its steady-state condi-
tions with a constant speed (i.e., a0= 0 )[4].
By deﬁning dias the desired distance between the platoon
leader and the i-th follower, i.e., di=iP
k=1dk 1;k, the ob-
jective (2b) can be recast as lim
t!+1ks0 si dik= 0 which
together (2a) represent a synchronisation problem of the N+1
nodes where the leader is the pinner providing the reference
trajectory [23].III. F ULLY SELF -ORGANISING PLATOON CONTROL
The idea behind the fully adaptive platoon control is to
use the theory of the adaptive networks to make not only
the control gains but also the entries of the adjacency matrix
AN+1ofGN+1(or equivalently the arcs of the topology)
adaptive based on the mismatches among the dynamics of
the platoon members. Given a platoon of N+ 1 vehicles
(Nfollowers and one leader) modelled as in (1), the state
mismatch or error between two platoon vehicles is deﬁned as
eT
ij=h
e(s)
ije(v)
ije(a)
iji
; (3)
withi= 1;2;:::;N ,j= 0;1;:::;N and
e(s)
ij=si sj dij; e(v)
ij=vi vj; e(a)
ij=ai aj;(4)
wheredijis the required inter-vehicular distance between the
j-th vehicle with respect to i-th vehicle.
Based on the information from its neighbors, the i-th
follower computes the control action in a distributed way as
ui= X
j:j2Nieaij(t)KT
ij(t)eij; (5)
whereKT
ij(t) = [K(s)
ij(t)K(v)
ij(t)K(a)
ij(t)]andeaij(t), with
(j;i)2EN+1, are the adaptive gains and the coefﬁcients of
the adjacency matrix AN+1ofGN+1, respectively.
In accordance with the theory of adaptive evolving networks
[19], eacheaij(t)is the output of a second order system with
state
 ij_ ij
evolving in a potential ﬁeld. Hence,
 ij+ij_ ij+dUij
d ij( ij) =F(keijkQij); (6a)
~aij(t) = 2
ij(t); (j;i)2EN+1; (6b)
whereFis a smooth K1scalar function, ijare positive
constants andkeijkQij=q
eT
ijQijeij, withQij2RNN
being a positive deﬁnite diagonal matrix, and Uij( ij)is the
potential function
Uij( ij) = 16Bij 2
ij( ij 1)2;(j;i)2EN+1;(7)
withBijbeing positive constants.
Notice that, the potential function Uij( ij)in (7) has two
global minima (or stable equilibria) in 0and1, respectively,
where the potential is zero, while Bijis the height of
the potential barrier separating the two stable equilibria and
Uij(0:5) =Bij.
The adaptive mechanism for the control gains is chosen as
_Kij=ij (eij) ij(Kij)Kij;(j;i)2EN+1;(8)
whereij=diag((s)
ij;(v)
ij;(a)
ij)2R33andij=
diag((s)
ij;(v)
ij;(a)
ij)2R33are diagonal matrixes with
()
ijand()
ij,2 fs;v;ag, being positive coefﬁcients,
 (eij) = [(e(s)
ij)(e(v)
ij)(e(a)
ij)]T2R3where(e()
ij),
2fs;v;agare sufﬁciently smooth positive scalar functions,
while (Kij) = diag((s)
ij(K(s)
ij);(v)
ij(K(v)
ij);(a)
ij(K(a)
ij))2
R33, where()
ij(K()
ij),2fs;v;ag, is the-modiﬁcation
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
297
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
function to limit the growth of the corresponding adaptive
control gain. In this paper the -function is selected as
(e()
ij) =e()
ijq
()
ij+()
ije()
ijq;(j;i)2EN+1; 2fs;v;ag;(9)
with()
ijand()
ijbeing positive constants, 0<q2, while
the-modiﬁcation functions, ()
ij(K()
ij), are inspired by those
presented in [20] and are computed as
()
ij(K()
ij) =8
>>>><
>>>>:0; ifK()
ijM()
ij  
K()
ij
M()
ij 1!
ifM()
ijK()
ij2M()
ij
1; ifK()
ijM()
ij(10)
whereM()
ij>0constants, (j;i)2EN+1and2fs;v;ag.
Remarks.
The dynamics of each entry eaij(t)in (6) is equivalent to
the nonlinear output of a unitary mass system evolving in the
potential ﬁeld (7) and subjected to a linear damping and an
external force as suggested in [19]. In this paper, the forcing
function has been selected as F(keijkQij) =eT
ijQijeij.
According to [19], the potential ﬁeld (7) imposes two
stable equilibria to each point-mass system in (6), 0and
1, respectively. Consequently, the evolution of each entry
eaij(t)will eventually converge either to 1or0. When an
entryeaijconverges to 0the corresponding arc in GN+1can
be removed from the platoon network topology and the i-
th vehicle will continue to compute the control action (5)
without using the information from the j-th vehicle. On
the contrary, if eaijconverges to 1, the corresponding arc
is kept and the i-th vehicle will continue to compute the
control action (5) by using the information from the j-th
vehicle. Furthermore, in steady-state a new topology, known
as emerging topology, is obtained [19]. The emerging pla-
toon topology is denoted as G(1)
N+1= (VN+1;E(1)
N+1), where
E(1)
N+1=f(j;i )2EN+1jlim
t!+1eaij(t) = 1g.
The control action (5) includes the platoon control ap-
proaches presented in [4], [6], [25] as particular cases. Indeed,
when both the platoon topology and control gains are ﬁxed
the control action (5) reduces to that presented in [4], [6].
Moreover, when the platoon network topology is not adapted
and the adaptive mechanism for the control gains in (9) is
replaced with (e()
ij) = (e()
ij)2(i.e.,q= 2,()
ij= 1 and
()
ij= 0 in (9)) but without the use of the -modiﬁcation
functions (i.e., in the case (Kij) = 02R3in (8)), the
control action (5) reduces to that presented in [25] assuming
also that the network latency is negligible. However, different
from [25], the adaptive law (9) with ()
ij>0and()
ij>0
guarantees that the derivative of the adaptive gains is bounded
also in the presence of large errors among platoon members.
It is noted that, also the magnitude of the adaptive control
gains is kept bounded despite possible external disturbances
and unmodelled dynamics as the adaptive mechanism (8) has
been equipped with the -modiﬁcation strategy (10), which
also allows the adaptive control gains to decrease.The adaptive mechanisms (9) is inspired by the adaptive
approach for the synchronisation of dynamic networks in [19],
[26]. However, in [19], [26] for each arc of the network, the
corresponding adaptive control gain was a scalar (the coupling
strength) and not a vector and it was computed based on
the norm of the difference between the states of the vertices
of the arc. Furthermore in [19], [26], the coupling among
connected nodes was supposed to be available at each equation
of the node model (i.e., the control was available at each
equation of the node model) and the individual dynamics of
the nodes were supposed to be identical. In the case of the
platoon problem, the coupling between two nodes is possible
only on the third state variable where the control action is
available, and the vehicle dynamics (node dynamics) are not
identical (heterogeneous platoon, see Section II-B). Moreover,
each entry of the adaptive control gain in (8) depends only on
the corresponding entry of the error vector in (3),(4).
In [26], [19], [25], the adaptive control gains are computed
as the integral of a positive function of the difference between
the dynamics of the coupled nodes. Consequently, the adaptive
control gains can only increase and eventually converge to
some constant values in the case of perfect synchronisation.
However, if perfect synchronisation cannot be achieved, for in-
stance, because of persistent external disturbances (e.g., in the
case of vehicle platooning, because of nonlinear aerodynamic
drag force, rolling resistance and variation of the road slope),
the residual synchronisation error might result in diverging
control gains. To prevent a possible unbounded drift of the
control gains, in this paper the -modiﬁcation strategy (10) is
used which also allow the control gains (8) to decrease.
IV. P LATOON CONTROL SUPPORTED BY THE CARMA
FRAMEWORK
The proposed platoon control system leverages on the cloud
computing platform under development within the CARMA
project. The CARMA project aims to develop and test co-
operative automated driving technology, which is enabled by
an ultra-low latency and highly reliable cloud-based infras-
tructure accessed through 5G. The CARMA approach is that
of a distributed control system in which the executions of
autonomous functions are distributed between the on-board
system and a cloud-based high performance shared back-
end system. The CARMA architecture is logically divided
into three layers, i.e. the CARMA Vehicle, the CARMA
Edge and the CARMA Core [17]. The CARMA Vehicle
connects various on-board sensors, infotainment equipment,
on-board embedded processors, HMI equipment, and actuators
to apply control commands. The on-board control components
operate in cooperation with the CARMA Edge while assuring
fault-tolerance of the system in cases when the connection
is disrupted. Further, since vehicle safety is of paramount
importance, on-board controllers are also responsible to assess
and potentially override the remotely computed instructions
(from cloud/edge) to ensure the safety of the vehicle.
The CARMA Edge hosts off-board processes and infor-
mation that require tight access (low latency) with the vehi-
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
298
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 1. Architecture for the platoon control and management [22].
Fig. 2. Platoon framework. Cj,j= 1:::N , is the on-board adaptive
controller described in Section III; the wide arrows represent the information
that each follower receives through the CARMA platform about the state of
the other platoon vehicles. For the i-th follower, the structure of the controller
and the information received from the CARMA platform are expanded.
cles. This will include information collected from around the
vehicle and processes that require cooperation with roadside
equipment and other vehicles. This concept is borrowed from
ETSI Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) framework, where
MEC servers can be installed at Road Side Units or cell
sites. It is noted that edge servers would provide key 5G
communication and networking services to enable low-latency
and highly reliable communication from the vehicle to the
CARMA Edge and vice versa. It also enables V2V commu-
nications, as all data trafﬁc is routed locally through the edge
of the network (Vehicle-to-Cloud-to-Vehicle). The CARMA
Core is a cloud-based back-end system, based on commercially
available public cloud resources. This also provides interfaces
for a variety of stakeholders that provide or use information
from CARMA vehicles.
Figure 1 shows the functional architecture for the platooning
control and management proposed within the CARMA project
and recently published in [22]. The ﬁrst two levels (i.e., Trip
Planner andRoad Section Manager ) of the functional archi-
tecture are devoted to promoting platoon formation of CA Vs
in mixed trafﬁc scenarios while optimising platoon velocity
and inter-vehicular distances on the platoon journey. In the
lowest level of the architecture, i.e., Coordination Control,
there are controllers for planning and executing cooperative
platoon manoeuvres, such as the CACC method in Section III,
and controllers for planning/executing merging and leaving a
platoon.
Figure 2 shows schematically the working principle of the
control algorithm presented in Section III supported by the
CARMA framework. Each platoon vehicle is connected to
the CARMA platform and through the CARMA Edges the
platoon vehicles share the information for implementing theAlgorithm 1 Fully adaptive platoon control (i -th Follower)
1:initialise:
2: Request to the CARMA Edge the parameter vector $i
3: when$iis available, then shift to CACC mode
4:procedure FULLADAPTIVE CACC
5: while i-th vehicle is in the CACC mode do
6: Receive zj,j2Ni, from the CARMA Edge
7: Compute eij,j2Ni, by using (3)
8: Update eaij,j2Ni, by using (6)
9: Update Kij,j2Ni, by using (8)
10: Compute uiby using (5)
11:J? 
j?2Nijeaij?is in steady-state and eaij?= 0	
12:ri fRemove zj?,j?2J?from the CARMA Edge payloadg
13:Ni Ni J?
14:end
control action (5), i.e., zi= [siviai]T. Each vehicle sends
to the CARMA Edge its state ziwhich is stored and made
available to other vehicles [22]. The platoon leader receives
from the CARMA Edge the platoon reference velocity that
optimises the consumption of the entire ﬂeet [22]. The generic
i-th follower receives from the CARMA Edge the states of the
other platoon members and a set of parameters (denoted as $i
in Figure 2), and it can send requests to the CARMA platform
(denoted as riin Figure 2). The vector of the parameter is
sent to the i-th follower when it joins the platoon and it
contains the initial set Ni, the required inter-vehicular distance
that optimises fuel consumptions [22], and the parameters
for implementing (6)-(10). After the join operation, the i-th
vehicle periodically receives from the CARMA Edge the states
zjwithj2Ni. Based on this information the i-th follower
computes the entry of the adjacency matrix of GN+1as in
(6), the adaptive gains as in (8)-(10), and the control action
in (5). The on-board system of the i-th follower also monitors
the evolution of eaij,j2Ni, and detect the indexes j?such
that the corresponding eaij?is in steady-state and the steady-
state value is 0. Finally, the i-th follower removes each j?
fromNiand requires to the CARMA Edge to not receive
the information from the j?-th platoon vehicle any longer,
thus reducing the overall network load. The steps executed
by thei-th vehicle after the join operation while driving in
CACC mode are brieﬂy summarised in Algorithm 1. Notice
that the while-loop in Algorithm 1 is executed as far as
the follower is operated in CACC mode, i.e., as far as an
exit platoon operation or a dissolve platoon operation is not
required [22]. Furthermore, with the request riin Step 12the
i-th vehicle requests to the CARMA Edge to not send the
information of the vehicles j?2J?for future transmissions
as they have adaptively excluded from the computation of
the control action. Additional details about how some steps
in Algorithm 1 are carried out are not given for the sake of
brevity. Furthermore, the closed-loop analysis for the control
algorithm in Section III which includes the -modiﬁcation
strategy will be presented elsewhere.
V. N UMERICAL RESULTS
The effectiveness of the control action (5) to achieve the
cooperative platoon motion is numerically conﬁrmed for a
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
299
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 3. Time-varying smooth speed leader reference proﬁle.
heterogeneous platoon composed of 10followers. For this
case study a constant spacing policy with di 1;i= 5 m,
i= 1;:::;N is used. The initial vehicle states are randomly
chosen but such that there are no collisions at initial time
instant t = 0. Similarly, also the time constant of each vehicle
in (1) is uniformly randomly chosen within the range 2
[0:1;0:8] s [27]. The adaptive weights are selected as a trade-
off between convergence time of the inter-vehicular distance
errors to zero and reactivity of the control actions. The initial
platoon topology is an all-to-all topology, but other choices
(e.g., those discussed in [2]) are possible. Furthermore, the
potential barriers and the adaptive weights with respect to the
followers’ information are chosen symmetric (i.e., Bij=Bji,
ij=ji,ij=ji,ij=ji,()
ij=()
ji,()
ij=()
ji,
M()
ij=M()
ji,2 fs;v;ag,i;j= 1; 2;:::N ,i6=j),
thus assuring that the topology among followers (i.e., GN) is
always undirected1as in [6], [19] to achieve synchronisation.
The leader’s speed manoeuvre is composed by three sub-
manoeuvres: (a)an initial constant velocity set to 72km/h
up tot= 30 s;(b)a trapezoidal shape with an increase of the
leader’s speed from 72km/h to 90km/h in 5s and back (see
also Figure 3a); and (c)a sinusoidal wave starting at t= 90 s,
with period 15s, amplitude 16:5 km/h and bias 88:5 km/h
(see also Figure 3b). Furthermore, to show that the followers
well synchronise their velocities, the relative velocities among
the followers are quantitatively measured with the use of the
following performance indexes

v= max
t2T 0fv(t)g; Ev=mean
t2T 0fv(t)g;v= var
t2T 0fv(t)g;(11)
whereTOis the time range of interest and v(t)is the
maximum percentage velocity variation among the followers
with respect to the mean followers speed at the time instant t,
thus it is computed as
v(t) =100
1
NNP
i=1vi(t)max
i;j=1:::Njvi(t) vj(t)j: (12)
The ability of the control approach to meet the platoon
control objectives is shown in Figure 4. At the time instant
t= 0, there are mismatches among follower states, e.g.,
there are inter-vehicular distance errors up to 2m among
consecutive platoon members and large variations among the
1The topologyGNis undirected, if (j;i)2ENthen(i;j)2EN
(a)
 (b)
(c)
Fig. 4. Platoon control performance at the control activation: (a) inter-
vehicular distance error; (b) vehicle velocities and (c) vehicle accelerations
(the velocity and acceleration of the leader are in black-dashed line).
velocities of the followers. However, when the distributed
platoon controllers are activated (t 0), vehicle dynamics are
steered towards the desired behaviour (i.e., zero inter-vehicular
distance errors, zero accelerations, and matching of the leader
velocity) and the convergence time is less than 4s.
When the cooperative platoon motion is established, the
control algorithm is able to maintain the cooperative driving
for time-varying speed proﬁles of the leader with small resid-
ual errors. The robustness of the control solution with respect
to smooth variations of leader’s velocity is shown in Figure 5
which depicts the inter-vehicular distance error (e(s)
i 1;i) and the
velocity and acceleration errors of the followers with respect to
the leader, i.e., e(v)
i0ande(a)
i0,i= 1;2;:::N , respectively. Fig-
ure 5a and Figure 5b conﬁrm that the inter-vehicular distance
errors for the trapezoidal and sinusoidal shapes never exceed
6cm and 10cm, respectively. Moreover, Figure 5 also shows
that the order of magnitude of the velocity and acceleration
errors of the followers with respect to the leader does not
strongly depend on the position of the follower in the ﬂeet (i.e.,
there is an overlapping of all followers velocity/acceleration
errors), thus followers well synchronise their motion also when
there exist errors between the followers and the leader. This
is also conﬁrmed in Figure 6 where it is shown that the
relative velocity between any pair of followers is in the range
[ 0:3; 0:3] km/h for both sub-manoeuvres. It is noted that
such errors are negligible when compared to the magnitude
of the followers’ speed over the sub-manoeuvres. Indeed, it
was noted that (
v; Ev;v) = (0:35; 0:12; 0:012)% and
(
v; Ev;v) = (0:39; 0:2; 0:010)% for the manoeuvres
in Figure 3a and Figure 3b, respectively. Hence, for both sub-
manoeuvres, the maximum percentage variation of the relative
velocity among the followers is always below 0:4%, while the
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
300
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
Fig. 5. Inter-vehicular distance error (a), velocity error (c) and acceleration
error (e) for the leader-speed proﬁle in Figure 3a. Inter-vehicular distance error
(b), velocity error (d) and acceleration error (f) for the leader-speed proﬁle in
Figure 3b.
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 6. Relative velocity between any pair of followers (i.e., e(v)
ij,i;j=
1;2;:::N ,i6=j) when the leader speed proﬁle is (a) trapezoidal (Figure
3a) and (b) sinusoidal (Figure 3b).
mean relative speed variations are about 0:12% and0:2%, for
the trapezoidal shape and sinusoidal wave, respectively, with
a variance of about 0:01 for both sub-manoeuvres.
The use of the -modiﬁcation functions in (10) limit the
growth of the adaptive gains (8) and allow them to decrease
when they exceed the corresponding threshold, i.e., M()
ij,
2fs;v;ag. This is shown in Figure 7a-Figure 7c where
the transient of the adaptive control gains is depicted. It is
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Fig. 7. (a)K(s)
ij; (b)K(v)
ij; (c)K(a)
ijand (d) entries of the AN+1-matrix.
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 8. Platoon network topology, leader (green circle), follower (blue circles),
directed arcs from the Leader to the Followers (red lines), undirected arcs
among Followers (black line) (a) initial all-to-all topology and (b) ﬁnal
emerging topology. Notice that the networks in the picture represent only
how vehicles exchange information and not their positions on the road.
noted that all the control gains are bounded and converging
to constant values. Moreover, for some control gains, the -
modiﬁcation term in (8) becomes active thus inverting the
increasing trend of the corresponding control gain. It is noted
that, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, this kind of
dynamics of the adaptive gains cannot be obtained neither with
the adaptive networked control systems nor with the network-
based adaptive platoon solutions available in the literature.
Moreover, as the vehicles states and the control gains are
bounded (see Figures 4, 5, 6, 7), the control actions (5) are
bounded, but they are not shown for the sake of brevity.
As discussed in Section III, the potential ﬁeld (7) imposes
two stable equilibria, i.e., 0and1, to the second order systems
in (6) that model the dynamics of the entries of the adjacency
matrixAN+1ofGN+1. This is conﬁrmed in Figure 7d where
the entries ofAN+1are depicted. The arcs corresponding to
the entries ofAN+1that converge to zero are removed from
the initial all-to-all topology as described in Section IV, thus
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
301
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 9. Percentage reduction of the arcs in the emerging platoon network
topology with respect to the number of followers N.
a new platoon topology in steady-state emerges. The all-to-
all topology and the emerging topology are both depicted
in Figure 8. The all-to-all in Figure 8a has 100 arcs while
the emerging topology in Figure 8b has 38arcs, thus the
adaptive algorithm has reduced the amount of the data on the
network of 62%. Under the same working conditions, a similar
percentage arc reduction in the topology has been noted also
for platoons with a larger number of followers. Figure 9 shows
this percentage reduction with respect to the number of the
followers. It is noted that the achieved reduction is always
above 60% (except when N= 13, where a reduction of about
57:5% was noted).
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper has investigated a fully self-organising platoon
control system supported by cloud-computing where both the
platoon network topology the control gains adapt based on the
dynamics of the vehicles involved in the cooperative driving.
To limit the growth of the adaptive gains, the adaptive law has
been equipped with sigma-modiﬁcation functions. Numerical
results have conﬁrmed the effectiveness of the control method
to create and maintain platoons of vehicles despite a time-
varying velocity of the platoon leader as well as the ability of
the platoon to adaptively select its network topology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Jaguar Land Rover and
the UK-EPSRC grant EP/N01300X/1 as part of the jointly
funded Towards Autonomy: Smart and Connected Control
(TASCC) Programme and is subject to UK patent under
UKIPO GB1810437:2 (under review).
REFERENCES
[1] U. Montanaro, S. Dixit, S. Fallah, M. Dianati, A. Stevens, D. Oxtoby,
and A. Mouzakitis, “Towards connected autonomous driving: review of
use-cases,” Vehicle System Dynamics, 2018.
[2] S. E. Li, Y . Zheng, K. Li, and L. Wang, “An Overview of Vehicular
Platoon Control under the Four-Component Framework,” in IEEE Intel-
ligent Vehicles Symposium, 2015, pp. 286–291.
[3] J. Ploeg, N. Van De Wouw, and H. Nijmeijer, “Fault tolerance of
cooperative vehicle platoons subject to communication delay,” in IFAC
Workshop on Time Delay Systems, 2015, pp. 352–357.
[4] Y . Zheng, S. E. Li, J. Wang, D. Cao, and K. Li, “Stability and scalability
of homogeneous vehicular platoon: Study on the inﬂuence of informa-
tion ﬂow topologies,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 14–26, 2016.
[5] J. C. Zegers, E. Semsar-Kazerooni, J. Ploeg, N. van de Wouw, and
H. Nijmeijer, “Consensus control for vehicular platooning with velocity
constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Control System Technology, 2017.[6] Y . Zheng, S. E. Li, K. Li, and L.-Y . Wang, “Stability margin im-
provement of vehicular platoon considering undirected topology and
asymmetric control,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology,
vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1253–1265, 2016.
[7] S. E. Li, X. Qin, K. Li, J. Wang, and B. Xie, “Robustness analysis and
controller synthesis of homogeneous vehicular platoons with bounded
parameter uncertainty,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics,
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 101–1025, 2017.
[8] C. L. E. M.Van Eenennaam, W. K. W. K. Wolterink, G. Karagiannis,
G. Heijenk, and J. Ploeg, “Impact of packet loss on cacc string stability
performance,” in 11th International Conference on ITS Telecommunica-
tions.
[9] Y . A. Harfouch, S. Yuan, and S. Baldi, “An adaptive switched control
approach to heterogeneous platooning with inter-vehicle communication
losses,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems, in press.
[10] J. P. Maschuw and D. Abel, “Longitudinal vehicle guidance in networks
with changing communication topology,” in 6th IFAC Symposium Ad-
vances in Automotive Control.
[11] U. Montanaro, G. Fiengo, A. Tufano, and S. Santini, “On the ef-
fectiveness of the extended cooperative adaptive control for vehicles
platooning,” in European Control Conference, 2016, pp. 2453–2458.
[12] Opportunities in 5G Networks: A Research and Development Perspec-
tive. CRC Press, 2016.
[13] H. Cao, S. Gangakhedkar, A. R. Ali, M. Gharba, and J. Eichinger, “A
5g v2x testbed for cooperative automated driving,” in IEEE Vehicular
Networking Conference, 2017.
[14] Y . Zheng, S. E. Li, K. Li, and W. Ren, “Platooning of connected
vehicles with undirected topologies: Robustness analysis and distributed
h-inﬁnity controller synthesis,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1353 – 1364, 2018.
[15] I. A. Ridhawi, M. Aloqaily, Y . Kotb, Y . A. Ridhawi, and Y . Jararweh, “A
collaborative mobile edge computing and user solutionfor service com-
position in 5g systems,” Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications
Technologies, 2018.
[16] I. Parvez, A. Rahmati, I. Guvenc, A. I. Sarwat, and H. Dai, “A survey
on low latency towards 5g: Ran, core network and caching solutions,”
IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 2018.
[17] A. Stevens, M. Dianati, K. Katsaros, C. Han, S. Fallah, C. Maple,
F. McCullough, and A. Mouzakitis, “Cooperative automation through
the cloud: The CARMA project,” in ITS European Congress, 2017.
[18] Z. H. Mir and F. Filali, “Lte and ieee 802.11p for vehicular networking:a
performance evaluation,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communica-
tions and Networking, 2014.
[19] P. de Lellis, M. di Bernardo, and M. Porﬁri, “Pinning control of complex
networks via edge snapping,” Chaos, vol. 21, no. 3, 2011.
[20] U. Montanaro and J. M. Olm, “Integral mrac with minimal controller
synthesis and bounded adaptive gains: The continuous-time case,” Jour-
nal of the Franklin Institute, vol. 353, no. 18, pp. 5040–5067, 2016.
[21] M. di Bernardo, A. di Gaeta, U. Montanaro, and S. Santini, “Synthesis
and experimental validation of the novel lq-nemcsi adaptive strategy
on an electronic throttle valve,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems
Technology, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1325 – 1337, 2010.
[22] U. Montanaro, S. Fallah, M. Dianati, D. Oxtoby, and T. M. A. Mouzaki-
tis, “Cloud-assisted distributed control system architecture for platoon-
ing,” in IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2018, accepted for publication.
[23] X. Wang and H. Su, “Pinning control of complex networked systems:
A decade after and beyond,” Annual Reviews in Control, vol. 38, no. 1,
pp. 103–111, 2014.
[24] S. Li, F. Gao, D. Cao, and K. Li, “Multiple model switching control
of vehicle longitudinal dynamics for platoon level automation,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 4480–4492,
2016.
[25] A. Petrillo, A. Salvi, S. Santini, and A. S. Valente, “Adaptive multi-
agents synchronization for collaborative driving of autonomous vehicles
with multiple communication delays,” Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging, vol. 86, pp. 372–392, 2018.
[26] P. de Lellis, M. di Bernardo, and F. Garofalo, “Novel decentralized
adaptive strategies for the synchronization of complex networks,” Auto-
matica, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1312–1318, 2009.
[27] A. M. H. Al-Jhayyish and K. W. Schmidt, “Feedforward strategies for
cooperative adaptive cruise control in heterogeneous vehicle strings,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 113–122, 2018.
2018 Fifth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IoTSMS)
302
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Surrey. Downloaded on December 14,2024 at 02:34:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
