=== Metadata ===
{
    "file_name": "Self-driving and coope- rative cars.pdf",
    "file_path": "/Users/mf0016/Desktop/soe_RAG/resources/Self-driving and coope- rative cars.pdf",
    "status": "Processed"
}

=== Content ===
1
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsKapitelname
Opportunities for safe, 
efficient, and sustainable 
mobility for everyone
Perspectives, need for action and regulationSelf-driving 
and coope-
rative carsE-BOOK
2
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative cars
The Author  .............................................................................................................  3
IKEM Introduction ..................................................................................................  4
Introduction: Science-fiction meets the road ....................................................... 5
 How have self-driving and cooperative cars developed in the past few years? ...................... 6
 Current situation: Autonomous driving today  .................................................................................... 7
Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? ...................................... 9
 Autonomous means independent of a driver  ..................................................................................11
 The level of automation doesn’t reveal everything .........................................................................12
 Humans continue to take over responsibility in the system ........................................................15
 The technologies behind the autonomy  ...........................................................................................17
 Cooperative driving: From vehicle system to integrated overall system? ...............................25
 Manual, automated, and self-driving mode. What does this mean? ........................................29
 Self-driving mode needs its own regulations ..................................................................................36
The Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all ......................... 39
 Opportunities for traffic and the job market  ......................................................................................40
 The opportunities for sustainability  .....................................................................................................45
 The risks of data misuse and access opportunities ......................................................................49
In Conclusion: A new mobility landscape? .......................................................... 50
 Outlook for private transport  ..................................................................................................................52
 Prospects for commercial vehicles and company transport  .......................................................53T able of content
3
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsNext chapter  
The Author
Assessor jur. Matthias Hartwig is a fully qualified 
lawyer and has been a scientific advisor to the 
Institute for Climate Protection, Energy and 
Mobility (IKEM) since 2011. Leading the Mobility 
T eam since 2014, he also deals with the legal 
issues surrounding mobility. These include the 
following areas:
• Energy industry, road, and traffic law
• Planning law
• Incentive and funding models in the area of 
mobility
• Business legal framework for mobility (in 
particular state aid, procurement, and antitrust 
law)
Along with his team, he researches a variety 
of projects relating to the legal, economic, and 
social issues revolving around motor vehicles 
with automated or autonomous driving features:
 www.ikem.de/en/team/matthias-hartwig

4
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIKEM Introduction
The Institute for Climate Protection, Energy and Mobility 
(IKEM) is an independent, non-profit association and 
affiliated institute of the Universität Greifswald. The 
IKEM researches key scientific issues that focus on 
implementing a sustainable and social order whilst 
using an interdisciplinary and integrative international 
perspective. IKEM’s central research topics include: 
• Expansion of renewable energy sources
• Energy grids that are fit for the future
• Electromobility
• Digitalization, automation, and the networking of 
transport 
• Related traffic and mobility issues
• Implementation of climate protection goals
• Basic issues of energy supply, planning, resource 
conservation, and efficiency
You can find an overview of IKEM’s projects, partners, and 
publications at:
 
 www.ikem.de/enNext chapter  

5
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIntroduction:
Science-fiction meets 
the road
Next chapter  

6
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIntroduction: Science-fiction meets the road
How have self-driving 
and cooperative cars 
developed in the past few 
years?
Do you think of robotic cars as a science-fiction topic? 
Just a few years ago, many experts would have agreed 
with you. However, times are changing. In 2004, the US 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
held its first competition in the Mojave Desert. The goal? 
For participants to develop a car with self-driving modes. 
The aim was to cover 150 miles within ten hours using a 
self-driving vehicle control system. The most successful 
vehicle only managed about 7,3 miles.
Since approximately 2011, several American technology 
companies have announced that their self-driving vehicles 
are nearing market maturity. These companies claimed 
that their vehicles successfully covered hundreds of 
thousands of test kilometers with only minor interventions 
from test drivers. Quite an achievement when compared 
to the short 7.3 miles achieved in the Mojave Desert 
just seven years prior. But where are the self-driving cars 
today?Next chapter  

7
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIntroduction: Science-fiction meets the road
Current situation: 
Autonomous driving today
Although these announcements may have been 
considered hasty and exaggerated in retrospect, these 
companies gave the market an important boost. Cars with 
self-driving mode (also known as autonomous vehicles, 
robot cars, driverless, or self-driving motor vehicles) 
have since made their way to the forefront of mobility 
research and are respectively hyped up by the media. For 
a while there was some discussion predicting that robot 
cars would replace conventional cars and although this 
may be the case in the future, the excitement has since 
subsided somewhat and has given way to a more realistic 
view for today’s world.
T oday, useful applications are already emerging leading to 
the self-driving cars being able to handle a fair amount of 
traffic situations on their own. However, almost all experts 
agree that long-term human support will be needed in 
certain traffic situations, as well as in vehicle maintenance 
and monitoring. In addition, self-driving mode cannot be 
used in all circumstances.
Next chapter  

8
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIntroduction: Science-fiction meets the road
Matthias Hartwig “Mixed traffic, in which vehicles of different 
levels of automation, cyclists, and 
pedestrians participate side by side, will 
continue to exist.”
If you think of cars with self-driving mode as science-fic-
tion, you’ll be surprised to find out:
• Where this technology stands today
• Why vehicles with self-driving mode will be soon be 
used on the road
• Why we can make good use of them (as they can 
contribute to sustainable, efficient mobility and 
contribute to road safety)
• What remains to be done on the road in order to 
achieve sustainable, safe, and efficient mobility for 
vehicles with self-driving mode.Next chapter  

9
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground:
What are vehicles with 
self-driving mode?
Next chapter  

10
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsOnce cars with self-driving mode are actively on 
the road amongst our everyday traffic, there will 
no longer be a need for the conventional manual 
drivers that we have today. Why? During the 
driverless ride there is no need for the passenger 
to be responsible for the constant monitoring of 
traffic or vehicle control elements in general. This 
is because the vehicle follows a program made 
by a human but controlled from outside of the 
vehicle by an attendant who takes on some of the 
functions and responsibilities that beforehand 
lay with the driver. T echnical tasks can also be 
performed via digital environment systems that 
then form an integrated overall system with the 
vehicle. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE 
International) prefers the definition “cooperative 
driving” for cars dependent on communication and/
or cooperation with outside entities such as those 
described above. In other words, we (humans) 
can set vehicles self-driving mode into motion 
and thus have overall control of the vehicle, at 
least by issuing commands that the vehicle then 
automatically implements.
A person can also take the vehicle out of traffic at any time. 
It is also important and necessary that we humans perform 
various functions in the maintenance and monitoring of 
the vehicle as well as being an accompaniment to the 
vehicle itself. Which functions and responsibilities lie within 
the vehicle system or the digital surrounding environment 
system and which lie with us as humans can differ greatly 
from system to system.Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  

11
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsKapitelnameAutonomous means 
independent of a driver
Autonomous doesn’t mean self-governing, but rather 
self-sufficient and independent of a driver. The term 
“autonomous” can be translated from Greek as either 
“self-governing” or “self-sufficient.” Vehicles with self-
driving mode do not drive in a “self-governing” fashion 
when in self-driving mode. They are directed by a code 
that programmers use to pre-determine the vehicle’s 
response. The program – and not the driver – thus 
determines the reaction of the vehicle in self-driving 
mode. Therefore, a more accurate translation would be 
“self-sufficient” in the sense that in most traffic situations 
the vehicle operates independently of human intervention 
and a driver does not need to constantly monitor or 
take over the system. This does not rule out a human 
switching off self-driving mode and then controlling the 
vehicle manually.

12
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative cars
Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Levels of automation facilitate the classification of automatic driving modes 
of the vehicles. In order to assess their functions, however, a closer look at the 
different systems is required.
Automated vehicles have different levels of automation. The differentiation into these 
stages allows for a better understanding and paves way for the possibility of discussion of 
these vehicles. Internationally, the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) classifies road 
vehicles into six automation levels (SAE level 0-5).1The level of automation 
doesn’t reveal everything
5
4
3
2
1
0
Full Automation
High Automation
Conditional Automation
Partial Automation
No AutomationDriver Assistance
Next chapter  

13
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Autonomous vehicles (full automation) or vehicles with SAE level 5 would, according to 
this definition, be vehicles that are operated full-time by an automated driving system 
without any interference from a human driver. 
Likewise, it is proving to be extremely difficult for current research projects to precisely 
classify vehicles designated as “autonomous” into SAE levels 3-5. Not just in research 
projects but also in everyday language and, for example, in the legal definitions of some 
American States. Therefore, the term “autonomous vehicle” is much broader. This text will 
discuss “motor vehicles with self-driving mode.”Matthias Hartwig “Such vehicles will not exist for at least the 
next 20 years.” Next chapter  

14
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsSelf-driving mode is essentially dynamic driving 
in specific roadway and environmental conditions 
without human intervention. It can only be activated 
if the basic conditions are right. 
Using the SAE levels, motor vehicles with 
self-driving mode in this context would best be 
classified as Level 4 (high automation). When 
self-driving mode is active, all aspects of the 
dynamic driving task under authorized roadway 
and environmental conditions are managed 
autonomously (self-sufficiently) by the vehicle. 
If the vehicle stays within its intended range of 
operation, no driver will be necessary. However, they 
cannot work independently “under all roadway and 
environmental conditions” as demanded by SAE 
Level 5. Hence the self-driving mode will be limited 
to specific roadway and environmental conditions 
and might depend on communication and/or 
cooperation with outside entities (for this, SAE 
suggested the definition of a cooperative rather 
than an autonomous vehicle). The system might 
even need to be monitored from outside the vehicle 
and with human technical back up in exceptional 
situations.What is self-driving mode?Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  

15
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Humans continue to take 
over responsibility in the 
system
Although self-driving mode can replace the driver 
after its activation, it cannot replace all humans in 
the system.
If there is no driver for a vehicle, humans in other functions 
take on some of the responsibility instead. In recent 
research projects – and everyday language – vehicles 
referred to as “autonomous” often have a safety driver 
who intervenes in critical situations. In these vehicles, 
self-driving mode is still under development. The 
consequence of this is that the driver of such vehicles 
has more responsibility than a conventional driver. The 
authorities that mandate the piloting companies require 
such vehicles to have a fully attentive licensed driver 
with special training behind the wheel at all times. For 
example, when issuing a “T esting Permit,” the New York 
State Department of Motor Vehicles states that “A person 
holding a valid driver license must be in the driver’s seat 
while a vehicle is operated on public highways.Next chapter  

16
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
That person must be prepared to take control when 
required to in order to operate the vehicle safely and 
lawfully. Every test vehicle operator must be adequately 
trained in the safe operation of the test vehicle to ensure 
both legal and safe operation.”2 In the US, there is no 
vehicle currently available for sale that is self-driving.3 
Even if in the future, with no drivers in the vehicle and the 
authorities not actively requiring one, there will be some 
sort of supervising vehicle attendant inside or outside 
of the vehicle. At the same time, the monitoring and 
maintenance staff at depots and in operating centers 
(or control centers) can play an important role. For a 
long time to come, those responsible – either inside 
or outside the vehicle – must be available to perform 
safety checks on the vehicle before start-up, to activate 
and deactivate the self-driving mode, and to guarantee 
reliable functioning while it’s in operation. In exceptional 
cases, it may even be necessary for an “emergency 
driver” to take over operation on-site or remotely. 
Furthermore, the authorities expect the applicant for 
a vehicle permit to “submit with this application a law 
enforcement interaction plan to inform law enforcement 
officers and first responders how to safely interact with 
the […] vehicle(s) in emergency and traffic enforcement 
situations.”4Next chapter  

17
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsKapitelnameThe technologies behind 
the autonomy
For a vehicle to move without driver intervention, it must 
itself have a sufficient wealth of information. In order 
to obtain this information and to provide this relevant 
information to the vehicle, various technical developments 
outside the vehicle are required. The following table gives 
an overview of the technology that enables self-driving 
mode, making it easier to understand what these vehicles 
can do. 

18
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsDriving order: The 
vehicle must “know” 
which destination it is 
expected to drive to.• A human always determines the driving order. The 
vehicle cannot decide “autonomously” where it 
is going, the human must input the destination 
themselves in some form or another (e.g. “Drive to the 
next charging station”).
• The digitalization of communication can help here, for 
example, apps and smartphones.Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Information T echnologies
Most of today’s transport positioning systems use the 
satellite-based Global Positioning System (GPS).  
GPS guarantees accuracy of positioning with deviations 
below eight meters. For self-driving mode, deviations of less 
than 5 cm may be required. This can be guaranteed by:
• Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS): 
Reference stations on the earth eliminate GPS 
inaccuracies.
• Landmark and marker orientation: If the system 
uses its sensors (camera) to recognize prominent 
landmarks whose position is stored in the system; they 
can position themselves with them. Road markings 
(center line) are also gathered to aid orientation.Self-positioning: The 
vehicle must “know” 
where it’s located.Next chapter  

19
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsInformation T echnologiesBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Self-status detection: 
The vehicle must know a 
lot about its own status: 
Functioning of important 
systems, direction of 
travel, speed, door closing, 
indoor and outdoor 
temperature, etc.Many different sensors provide this information: 
Odometers, rotation rate sensors on the wheels, 
gyrocompass, tire pressure sensors, door opening 
sensors, thermometer, etc.• “Virtual Rail” with Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) or other processes: Small 
chips or other electronic orientation aids are applied 
in or on the road or in the road environment, which 
corresponding transmitter-receiver systems can detect 
electromagnetically to use for self-positioning.
• If the speed and direction of travel of the vehicle are 
known due to vehicle data, a position change can be 
calculated.Next chapter  
Self-positioning: The 
vehicle must “know” 
where it’s located.
20
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsFrom static geodata (map data), to static traffic elements 
(traffic signs, construction sites), to traffic light signals, the 
position of fog banks, traffic congestion, individual cars, 
bicycles, and pedestrians, a motor vehicle with self-driving 
mode must have an accurate picture of its surroundings. 
A “Local Dynamic Map” (LDM) stores the required 
data in the vehicle. Static information (e.g. map data) can 
be stored in the LDM in advance and compared with the 
actual environment in test runs on the intended route. 
However, data fed in this way requires constant updating. 
The LDM may obtain data from sensors on the vehicle 
itself or from sensors or digital services outside the vehicle. 
(
 Illustration).
• T o satisfy the high demand for data, the vehicle must 
be networked with its environment. The following 
serve as communication:
• Mobile communications:  The large amounts 
of data can be handled better with a high mobile 
standard. The currently much-discussed 5G mobile 
standard seems particularly suitable here given its 
high data transmission rates, real-time transmission, 
and low latency.
• Wi-Fi: A wireless local area network (Wi-Fi) is being 
built by wireless modules on streetlights and sign 
gantries to improve communication.Information T echnologiesBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  
Roadway and envi-
ronmental conditions: 
The vehicle must “know” 
how to reach its desti-
nation the fastest and 
safest way.
Traffic situation: The 
vehicle needs the exact 
position of buildings and 
other fixed obstacles, 
the current position, the 
outline, the speed, and 
the direction of move-
ment of all road users in 
the area (cars, bicycles, 
pedestrians), traffic signs, 
traffic lights, etc. Only 
with a precise picture of 
the traffic situation can 
it also take into account 
all traffic regulations and 
avoid the endangerment 
of other road users.
21
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
• Sensors in the vehicle or on the roadside detect the 
traffic environment and situation:
• Digital camera: Cameras capture the environment 
optically, but may not detect everything (e.g. in 
darkness, fog, or backlight).
• Laser scanner/LIDAR: The distance and speed 
of objects can be measured by using many laser 
beams. This allows for the creation of an accurate 
picture of the environment.
• Radar and ultrasound sensors: Additional 
directional and distance measurement technologies 
complement the range of perception of other 
sensors and provide redundancy so that nothing is 
overlooked.
• Sensor data consolidation and evaluation: 
Different sensors and the images they have created 
and the data they collected have various advantages 
and disadvantages. Computers can use it to calculate 
a coherent picture that detects traffic much better than 
just one sensor.
• Regional digital map:  Geodata and dynamic 
traffic data can be merged and refined in a vehicle-
independent digital map. This data can be used by the 
vehicle.Information T echnologiesNext chapter  
Roadway and envi-
ronmental conditions: 
The vehicle must “know” 
how to reach its desti-
nation the fastest and 
safest way.
Traffic situation: The 
vehicle needs the exact 
position of buildings and 
other fixed obstacles, 
the current position, the 
outline, the speed, and 
the direction of move-
ment of all road users in 
the area (cars, bicycles, 
pedestrians), traffic signs, 
traffic lights, etc. Only 
with a precise picture of 
the traffic situation can 
it also take into account 
all traffic regulations and 
avoid the endangerment 
of other road users.
22
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Information T echnologies
• Sensor data from other vehicles (Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
Communication, V2V) can also be used, for example 
to supplement a regional digital map (e.g. traffic 
congestion information from other vehicles).
• Digital traffic signs: A camera cannot detect with 
sufficient reliability whether a traffic light is green or red. 
A digital radio signal from the traffic light can provide 
clarity in this case.
• Control technology: Brings together a large amount 
of data contained in an operator center in order to 
be able to centrally monitor and maintain the vehicle 
and infrastructure and coordinate the necessary 
interventions from outside.Next chapter  
Roadway and envi-
ronmental conditions: 
The vehicle must “know” 
how to reach its desti-
nation the fastest and 
safest way.
Traffic situation: The 
vehicle needs the exact 
position of buildings and 
other fixed obstacles, 
the current position, the 
outline, the speed, and 
the direction of move-
ment of all road users in 
the area (cars, bicycles, 
pedestrians), traffic signs, 
traffic lights, etc. Only 
with a precise picture of 
the traffic situation can 
it also take into account 
all traffic regulations and 
avoid the endangerment 
of other road users.
23
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Vehicle
Pedestrians
Ego vehicle
Slippery road
Signal phase
T raffic congestion
Landmarks
T raffic sign
Map Type 1Type 2Type 3Type 4
Type 1: Permanent static data (map data) 
Type 2: T ransistent static data (roadside infrastructure)
Type 3: T ransient dynamic data (congestion, signal phase) 
Type 4: Highly dinamic data (vehicles pedestrians)Example of a “Local Dynamic Map”Next chapter  

24
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Powerful computer programs and artificial intelligence
These processes are often used in image recognition and image analysis. For example, 
if a computer program has already analyzed tens of thousands of images of different 
models of cars, it will be able to identify a car as such even if it has not “seen” the specific 
model before. Accordingly, if the computer program has analyzed many vehicles turns, 
it can predict the course of a turning vehicle with certain probabilities. This ability is very 
important for self-driving mode since the systems are better able to navigate in unknown 
surroundings and constellations. Independent and ethically thought-out decisions, 
comparable to those of a human being, cannot be made by such systems. Therefore, the 
term “artificial intelligence” may give rise to partially exaggerated expectations.Artificial intelligence describes the ability of a 
computer program to extract logical correlations from 
large amounts of information (pattern analysis and 
pattern recognition) to draw conclusions according to 
certain rules (i.e. predicting patterns).What does artificial intelligence mean?In particular, the merging and evaluation of sensor data requires the use of powerful 
computers and complex programs. In this case, artificial intelligence can also be used.Next chapter  

25
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsKapitelnameThe self-driving vehicle system of a car with self-driving mode may, in certain 
circumstances, rely on digital surrounding environment systems (cooperative automation).5 
From a technical point of view, the vehicle system with digital surrounding environment 
systems can also be considered as an integrated overall system. This overall system 
must meet certain requirements to ensure optimum results for traffic safety and traffic 
flow. Autonomous driving (SAE: cooperative driving) requires a change of focus from the 
vehicle to an overall system because it will only achieve adequate performance in various 
traffic situations in close cooperation with digital surrounding environment systems. For 
example, when driving through traffic lights at a complicated intersection on-road sensors 
and digital signals from the traffic lights themselves would be needed at a red light to 
ensure safety and accuracy.
We are accustomed to associating cars almost as a uniform or a distinct tool used by a 
driver. This distinction is common to all traffic and vehicle safety regulations in every country. 
In the US the National T raffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act6 regulates motor vehicle safety 
and mandates the application of the Federal motor vehicle standards7 regarding design, 
construction and performance of all motor vehicles.8
Cooperative driving: From vehicle system 
to integrated overall system?
26
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsThen again the rules of the road are regulated by the Federal States and address the driver 
only, who must control his tool and is responsible for every action of the vehicle itself. If 
the driver in the vehicle becomes just a passenger, this division can no longer work. Car 
manufacturers must comply with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and certify that 
their vehicle well aligned with safety features to avoid risks under all circumstances and in 
all driving modes. For motor vehicles with autonomous motion functions this includes to 
ensure that they operate in compliance with the rules of the road.9 
The concept of the vehicle as a definable tool must also be questioned. Whether a vehicle 
with self-driving mode can handle its driving task safely and smoothly will increasingly 
depend on information originating from various digital surrounding environment systems 
(digital traffic signs, regional digital map, roadside sensors, etc.) (cooperative driving 
systems). The vehicle drives based upon its own digital map, which it continuously updates 
with the help of information from outside. The vehicle is not always able to decide on its 
own whether this data is reliable or not. It has to rely in part on the surrounding environment 
system. The U.S. Department of T ransportation states that cooperative automation will 
be “an important complementary technology that is expected to enhance the benefits of 
automation at all levels, but should not be and realistically cannot be a precondition to the 
deployment of automated vehicles.”10Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  
“I think that SAE Level 5 will remain a 
dream for quite a long time, but SAE Level 
4 Technology V2V and V2X will be very 
beneficial and more important than what 
the current discussion implies for the 
majority of valuable use cases.”
Matthias Hartwig 
27
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative cars• A vehicle cannot detect a conventional traffic light with a 
camera with enough reliability. 
• It can only drive quickly at an intersection if it gets a digital 
traffic signal. 
• However, this signal only has an added value if the traffic 
light operator guarantees its reliability. 
• The vehicle is thus increasingly cooperative with digital 
surrounding environment systems.Traffic light example
Parking garage example
• A parking garage designed for self-driving valet parking 
could soon be possible using comprehensive data where 
cameras and other sensors detect free parking spaces, 
vehicles, and pedestrians into a dynamic traffic map 
(technical surrounding environment system).
• Navigating becomes very easy for the motor vehicle in 
self-driving mode here. However, it must be able to rely 
on the given information. Not only does the vehicle have 
to be safe, but the vehicle and surrounding environment 
system must form a secure overall system to prevent 
accidents together.
• At a certain point, the question arises as to who is actually 
in control of the vehicle – the vehicle or the parking 
garage.Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  

28
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsThe vehicle and the surrounding environment system would technically form an overall 
system. Only if this overall system is safe and provides enough valid data for navigation will 
the vehicle be able to safely navigate and run smoothly through traffic. In order to ensure 
the identifiability of those responsible, there must be continual legal areas of responsibility. 
As a result, in the future it is likely that there will be system administrators for the vehicle 
whom will monitor the various digital surrounding environment systems. T echnically, a 
single system in isolation would often lead to a dead end as the required amount of safety 
precautions along with the monitoring of traffic flow can only be provided when there is 
an interaction of all components. Some expect this to result in a system approval process 
with very complex verification processes and accountability obligations. The emerging 
regulatory challenges are closely connected to the regulation of Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) 
and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure communication (V2X). No country has presented a regulatory 
approach for this technology as of yet. Car manufacturers have to petition for legislation as 
they can’t guarantee the safety of the integrated overall system on their own, while their 
vehicle is only a subsystem.Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
 Next chapter  

29
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsUntil Nevada authorized the operation of autonomous vehicles and endorsed a driver 
license for operators of autonomous vehicles, all traffic regulations in the US only referred 
to manual driving. It was never referred to as anything else, because until recently it 
was obvious that an alert driver would have to steer the vehicle at all times. Some driver 
assistance systems had already been regulated under the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standards (FMVSS), since from a regulatory perspective a driver assistance system 
doesn’t change the customary distribution of tasks between the human driver and the 
technical system. The driver remains responsible for driving the vehicle in every situation. 
They must observe traffic at all times and maintain control of the vehicle.While a variety of terms are used to describe automated vehicles and their 
driving modes, many experts and legislations identify three: manual driving, 
automated driving (sometimes called autonomous driving), and self-driving 
(sometimes called fully autonomous). These are 3 different driving modes with 
different regulatory and technical requirements. In this case, a single motor 
vehicle can have both a manual, an automated, and a self-driving mode.Manual, automated, and self-driving mode. 
What does this mean?
Manual driving modeBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  

30
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsSince 2011 legislation and executive orders have 
regulated the operation of automated vehicles on public 
roads in 41 States. Not only the first bill in Nevada, but 
all regulation requires a licensed and specially trained 
driver to be present in the vehicle, to monitor the vehicle 
and the traffic, and to be ready to take over control of the 
vehicle if necessary at all times. This driver still has the 
responsibility of a conventional driver and must comply 
or guarantee compliance with all rules of the road and 
traffic regulations, even during the automated journey. 
If the driver notices that his vehicle in the automatic 
driving mode violates regulations of the rules of the road 
and traffic regulations, they must deactivate the system 
and take over control. The system must independently 
register relevant deviations and then prompt the driver 
to deactivate the system. The greatest challenge for the 
developers of such vehicles is therefore to permanently 
maintain and control the attention of the driver, as it is 
still essential to the system. In aviation automation the 
demands are even higher with it being mandatory to have 
two piolets present in each airliner. In both pilots monitor 
each other respectively. A corresponding development for 
motorized, private transport on the road, however, is ruled 
out. The freedom of Americans to drive their own vehicles 
by obtaining a driver license should not be further limited 
due to excessive skill or intellectual requirements. Even 
today, for some it is not easy to obtain a driver’s license, 
this problem should not be exacerbated by automation.Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Automated driving modeNext chapter  

31
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative cars
Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  
Private transport usually means one person using a 
means of transport. Unlike public transit, this person 
determines the time period, the route, and the 
destination themselves. The most classic means of 
motorized private transport is the car.What is private transport?
32
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  
There is no legal framework for the use of motor vehicles with self-driving mode on public 
roads. “Every vehicle currently for sale in the United States requires the full attention of 
the driver at all times for safe operation.”11 Under the current FMVSS, no self-driving 
mode can be introduced according to any interpretation of the rules and exemptions 
from existing standards. The National Highway T raffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) can 
provide exemptions from existing standards, but only for limited exceptions in obligation 
to comply with the FMVSS.12 The FMVSS do not apply to motor vehicles “solely for 
purposes of testing or evaluation by a manufacturer that agrees not to sell or offer for sale 
the motor vehicle at the conclusion of the testing or evaluation.“ However, testing vehicles 
on public roads under this special condition leaves the manufacturer with an uncalculated 
risk of liability and doesn’t contribute to the development of proper legal framework for 
vehicles with self-diving mode. Therefore, the U.S. Department of T ransportation has 
promised while prioritizing safety to “modernize or eliminate outdated regulation that 
unnecessarily impede the development of automated vehicles or that do not address 
critical safety needs.”13 Having said this, a clear commitment to regulate vehicles with 
self-driving mode does not exist, because this would mean a paradigm shift in transport 
regulation. The driver may no longer be considered in the development of such a self-
driving mode. They are instead responsible for monitoring the system and assuming a 
fallback responsibility.
This circumstance requires a completely different system architecture of the vehicle. In 
self-driving mode, the vehicle must be able to solve all standard traffic situations it may 
encounter on its own. If the subsystem were to fail or in other exceptional situations, the 
vehicle must remain able to steer into safety (for example, to safely stop on the roadside). 
Human intervention may be necessary in clearly defined cases such as:
• During maintenance
• During activation
• In extraordinary traffic situations
• In exceptional situations
• After deliberate deactivation of self-driving mode by a personSelf-driving mode
33
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative cars“The developers of such vehicles must 
ultimately consider – and to a certain 
extent anticipate during development – 
any possible traffic situations that may 
require additional help.”Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode?
Matthias Hartwig Next chapter  
However, the vehicle must be designed so that a certain amount of time can elapse 
before the human helper takes action and it must not become a traffic obstacle during this 
waiting period.
The local limitation in the field of application plus the careful selection and design of 
the route can limit this complexity. For example, if a shuttle for a regular service is being 
developed by a local transport operator in a small residential area in a 30 MPH zone, a 
very detailed digital map can be maintained for this area, into which all traffic signs and 
regulations have already been entered in. If for example it is found that the vehicle is not 
able to overtake garbage trucks for some reason, the vehicle simple does not operate at 
the times during which garbage is picked up in the residential area. Alternatively, it can 
contact an operator center in time to authorize uncommon maneuvers. Such situations 
can be easily anticipated and planned for in a small-scale area. If the vehicle should 
nevertheless get into an unpredictable traffic situation, it can drive to the side of the road 
and wait for employees from the operator center to arrive.
34
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIn just a few years, there will be vehicles that can 
be controlled manually by a driver as well as having 
automated and self-driving modes.
Example: BMW 3 Series with various driving 
modes 
A BMW 3 Series with parking, traffic jam assist, and 
cruise control is already state-of-the-art. In a few years, 
additional assistance functions provided by the vehicle will 
be highly reliable even at higher speeds and there may 
even be talk of a highway assistant. Intervention by the 
driver would only be required in certain circumstances. 
The driver remains part of the system but is adequately 
guided to a necessary intervention (automatic driving 
mode). At the same time, however, it will still be possible 
for the driver to take over control of the vehicle, with only 
the driver and emergency assistance functions remaining 
active (manual driving mode). 
Furthermore, it is quite realistic that the parking assistant 
is then capable of so-called autonomous valet parking. 
The BMW 3 Series may be able to park itself – if the 
respective parking garage support this function. If both 
the vehicle and the parking garage offer this coordinated 
function, the driver exits at the barrier to the parking 
garage.Vehicles with several driving modesBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  

35
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative cars
Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  
In close coordination with the parking garage’s digital 
surrounding environment system, the vehicle takes 
over the journey to the parking space on the third floor. 
This self-driving mode could increasingly be used in 
other environments over the years, so long as it offers a 
corresponding digital surrounding environment system. 
The prerequisite for the activation of the self-driving mode 
will always be that the surrounding environment system is 
compatible, the vehicle is active and functional, and that 
the vehicle registers itself there.
The BMW 3 Series from this example would not be a 
manual, automated, or self-driving vehicle, but rather a 
motor vehicle with all three driving modes incorporated. 
In each of the three driving modes, the vehicle developers 
and the driver must take the specific regulations into 
account.
36
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsSelf-driving mode needs its own 
regulations
Manual, automated, and self-driving modes each need their own regulation. 
While the first regulation of manual driving coincided with the introduction of 
the first automobiles, the States started to regulate the operation of automated 
vehicles in 2011 and the U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) 
published the first Federal Automated Vehicles Policy in Sept. 2016.14 NHTSA, 
in contrast to manual and automated driving modes with self-driving mode the 
driver is no longer the reference point for regulation. Self-driving mode is also 
unable to simulate a human driver. Therefore, unique legal regulations based 
on the existing traffic law and ethical standards are necessary for this driving 
mode, but they must also take into account the technical conditions.
The “U. S. DOT automation principals” “will interpret and […] adapt the definitions of 
‘driver’ and ‘operator’ to recognize that such terms do not refer exclusively to a human, but 
may in fact include an automated system.”15 This means that when in self-driving mode 
the vehicle is the driver and needs to comply with the rules of the road in the same way 
a human driver would. Legal regulations are always used as instructions to people who 
interpret human laws (judges and decision-makers in business and administration). The 
requirement that an automated system ought to simulate the human driver is formulated 
here in an exaggerated fashion. This regulation makes sense for automated driving, 
because in this case a driver is constantly responsible for the system and must be able to 
take over control of the vehicle immediately in crisis situations. This driver will judge the 
system according to whether it is reacting in traffic situations as they would themselves.Background: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  

37
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsKapitelnameHumans and machines are too different in their reaction times and in how they perceive 
and analyze traffic situations for the application of the same set of regulations to make 
sense in each case. Humans have an intelligence that machines cannot simulate 
coupled with excellent image recognition and the ability to analyze situations. This is 
complemented by intuition and the ability to independently evaluate situations in terms 
of ethics, which machines lack. On the other hand, machines have an almost unlimited 
information processing capacity along with multitasking capabilities, which are ultimately 
limited only by the amount of information available to them. In terms of positive reactions, 
humans are able to demonstrate flexibility and therefore personal responsibility yet 
machines can react in a fraction of a second and can demonstrate superior reliability 
(adherence to a program). Self-driving modes therefore need their own guidelines for 
their development incorporated into the FMVSS. This must include the rules of the road 
and traffic regulations as it reflects legitimate expectations of other road users in mixed 
traffic. For example, self-driving vehicles should also stop at a red light, even if they have 
reliable information that no other vehicle is driving through the intersection. Otherwise, this 
would be a bad example. Apart from this, these regulations should be geared toward the 
capabilities of a machine and guided by optimal results for traffic safety and traffic flow.What can humans do and what can machines do?

38
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsA vehicle in self-driving mode cannot be addressed 
by any law or regulation, because they only apply 
to humans. Therefore, the safety of the self-driving 
strategy and reaction of the vehicle on the road must 
become subject to the FMVSS standards. But in the 
US, traffic is regulated by State law. This leads to the 
question of which State law should guide the FMVSS? 
This again shows that the rule of “self-driving vehicles 
should follow the rules of the road” is not very practical, 
because it would force the developers of a self-driving 
mode to look at the traffic regulations in all the States 
and territories in depth and (where appropriate) develop 
different driving software for different States. The U. S. 
DOT therefore already announced it “[u]rges States and 
localities to work to remove barriers […] to automated 
vehicle technologies and to support interoperability.”16 
As for self-driving mode, it should further review the 
rules of the road in all States and territories and develop 
technical standards that include the most important 
common rules whilst encouraging regulatory consistency 
for interoperability. The States will lose some of their 
regulative power because a vehicle in self-driving mode 
is not and never will be a human capable of complying 
with traffic regulations. The only chance for a common 
technical standard and interoperability is to open up the 
State traffic regulations that do not apply to vehicles in 
self-driving mode and trust the U.S. DOT and NHTSA to 
do a good job.Reviewing and modifying traffic 
laws and regulations of the StatesBackground: What are vehicles with self-driving mode? Next chapter  

39
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsThe Goal: More 
sustainable, safer, and 
efficient mobility for all
Motor vehicles with self-driving mode promise sustainable, safe, and efficient 
mobility for all. If and when this promise will be fulfilled depends on various 
factors.
With the support of the U.S. DOT , the State governments, and the European Union, 
not only large car companies but also many previously unknown companies new to the 
automotive industry (e.g. big data companies) are investing billions in research into motor 
vehicles with automated and self-driving modes and into the development of a digital 
surrounding environment for these vehicles.Next chapter  

40
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsThe Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all
Opportunities for traffic and 
the job market
All parties involved believe that motor vehicles with self-
driving mode can contribute to the achievement of the 
following objectives:
Ninety-four percent of all serious motor vehicle crashes 
“are due to human error or choices. Fully automated 
vehicles that can see more and act faster than human 
drivers could greatly reduce errors, the resulting crashes, 
and their toll.”18 Connected vehicles with automated or 
self-driving modes can absorb and process much more 
information in less time than a human driver and they do 
not get tired and are never drunk. They will not miss a 
digital traffic light and they can even look around corners 
to reliably detect complex traffic situations at intersections 
through roadside sensors. A majority of the sources of 
errors that are the cause of traffic accidents today can be 
excluded.Increasing the safety of traffic17Next chapter  

41
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative cars
However, automatic systems can and must be designed 
so that potential errors do not lead to life-threatening 
injuries or illnesses, and so that new sources of errors 
can be avoided. Motor vehicles with a self-driving mode 
can only be certified under the FMVSS and can only 
be registered if they avoid personal injury as much as is 
technologically possible and thus significantly reduce 
accidents when compared to human driving performance. 
The first U.S. DOT principle of automation therefore 
declares “We will prioritize safety.” Despite the very 
technology-friendly approach of the U.S. administration, 
the protection of the public “against all unreasonable 
risk of accidents occurring as a result of the design, 
construction or performance of motor vehicles”19 will 
always be the guiding principle for the road agency. As 
soon as vehicles with automated and self-driving modes 
can contribute to safety, they will take on an essential 
part of this protection strategy. Until then, high safety 
standards will be the challenge developers have to face.The Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all
Human error and a lack of information lead to a large part 
of traffic disruption. If available, automatic and cooperative 
systems can incorporate an almost unlimited amount 
of information for optimized driving and route guidance. Increasing the traffic flow and traffic 
efficiencyNext chapter  

42
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsWhether motor vehicles with automated driving mode increase or inhibit the flow of 
traffic largely depends on the abundance of geo-information and traffic information made 
available to them, as well as the development of on-board and roadside sensors and 
digital surrounding environment systems. A large amount of the required information is 
already available on the Internet. Weather services can now deliver valid weather data for 
cooperative driving. However, this validation remains a big challenge for map and traffic 
data all the way down to digital traffic lights. In addition, the roadside sensors for detecting 
the traffic and the parking situation (data-saving example, by radar and LIDAR) are not free, 
but promise a big increase in traffic efficiency in conventional parking spot searches. In 
research projects, for example, cities and municipalities are beginning to recognize new 
duties and design possibilities. In cooperation with private data companies, they could 
issue regional dynamic maps complemented by digital mobility platforms for their region, 
offering validated map data with information about traffic regulations, construction sites, 
enrich dynamic traffic data, and make it available for automated and self-driving modes as 
well as cooperative driving. This is an optimistic vision of the future, but with some political 
will it is certainly feasible.
The Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

43
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsThe global market for vehicles with self-driving mode is 
expected to reach $54.23 billion in 2019 and $556.67 
billion by 2026, an average growth rate of 39.47 
percent.21 U. S. DOT expects that “with the development 
of automated vehicles, American creativity and innovation 
hold the potential to once again transform mobility.”22 
The loss of jobs (e.g. bus drivers in public transit) is not 
to be feared in the coming years. Self-driving modes will 
only be able to handle more and more traffic situations 
gradually over time. Drivers will continue to be needed 
in dense city traffic, on the highway, and for large buses 
on major routes. However, the use of vehicles with 
self-driving mode could provide increased passenger 
numbers to public passenger transport and ride-sharing 
solutions. Self-driving minibuses can bring more 
passengers to central stops and make public transit and 
shared mobility more attractive. Even more, not fewer, 
drivers would probably be needed on the main routes. 
In addition, self-driving mode offers potential for more 
jobs in research, development, and maintenance. Control 
centers will also need staff who can monitor the vehicles 
and, in exceptional circumstances, quickly dispatch a 
technician to the job site, similar to the call centers of 
passenger elevator service providers.Creating new economic opportunities and 
jobs through technological modernization 
and innovation20The Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

44
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsA motor vehicle with self-driving mode has the potential 
for users to use the ride itself for both personal and 
work-related tasks. Commuters in particular may stand 
to regain a lot of time that was previously tied up with 
the task of driving. On the way to the office users could 
begin dealing with emails or watch a movie on their way 
home.“In addition, self-driving mode offers 
potential for more jobs in research, 
development, and maintenance.”
Matthias Hartwig 
New potential uses for the vehicle itselfThe Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

45
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsThe opportunities for 
sustainability
Many also hope that motor vehicles with a self-driving 
mode will also fulfill the following three promises. 
However, whether these can be realized depends on the 
right course of decision-makers in politics and business 
and on early and effective regulation by the legislature.
According to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change 
(2015), the increase in the global average temperature 
should be limited to well below 2 °C above pre-
industrial levels. Certain efforts are expected to limit 
the temperature rise to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial 
levels. Although the US is no longer committed to the 
agreement, climate protection will remain on the US 
and the international agenda. In particular, greenhouse 
gas emissions (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, 
and others) are expected to be significantly reduced.23 
Integrating climate action into national policies, strategies, 
and planning24 and is expected to significantly reduce the 
risks and impacts of climate change. Zero-emission transportThe Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

46
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIn many sectors (heat generation, agriculture) it is more difficult to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions than in the transport sector. Therefore, most experts agree that direct emissions 
from transport must reach zero in the long term in order to achieve the goals of the Climate 
Change Agreement (known as zero-emission transport). In addition, transport is known 
to be responsible for environmental and health issues caused by particulates, nitrogen 
compounds, and other emissions. Also, for this reason, zero-emission transport is an 
important political goal. The increase in traffic flow and traffic efficiency through the use 
of vehicles with self-driving mode is already able to make a proportionate contribution to 
reducing emissions, but in itself will not ensure zero- emissions transport. This requires, 
moreover, that all vehicles with self-driving mode are operated only with electricity from 
renewable sources (electric vehicles with batteries or fuel cells). Self-driving mode and 
battery-based electric engines also fit well together because the vehicle itself knows when 
it has to be charged and can automatically connect to a charging station. Therefore, most 
national and international projects on vehicles with automated and self-driving mode 
deploy electric vehicles. Automation, digitalization and electrification of transport are 
grouped together by experts.
The Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

47
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIf politics and economics pave the way, self-driving shuttles and similar vehicles with 
limited specific driving and local applications can enable local passenger transport in the 
near future, bringing everyone from door to door at any time. Properly designed, such 
a transport system would be able to cope with much fewer vehicles and hardly require 
parking (only stops). This has great potential for urban planning and the use of space. 
Areas currently used by traffic could have new uses (parks, playgrounds, cafes, etc.). 
A self-driving shuttle can also be programmed to treat all people equally, regardless of 
gender, age, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and physical characteristics or limitations. By 
taking socio-scientific insights into account, the feeling of safety for passengers could 
increase considerably. This can be accomplished, for example, by appropriately designing 
the vehicle, system, the stops, and the route guidance. This, too, has great significance for 
non-discriminatory transport.
T oday’s transport system focuses on motorized private transport. Especially in rural areas, 
therefore, all the people who are too young, too old, or too sick to drive their own car, or 
cannot afford one, are often excluded from mobility or dependent on someone else with 
a driver license. Motor vehicles with a self-driving mode can end this dependency by 
making conventional and new forms of public transit comprehensive and affordable for all 
municipalities.Access to safe, affordable, accessible, and sustainable 
transport systems for all25 and non-discriminatory transport26The Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

48
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsMobility for all promises an enhanced quality of life. Cities and towns whose streets and 
squares are used exclusively for driving and parking offer a lower quality of life. Asphalt 
road surfaces damage the soil and encourage flooding.27 Motor vehicles with self-driving 
mode – in conjunction with existing public transit – can provide convenient, reliable, and 
efficient door-to-door mobility for all and play an important role in local logistics.
Matthias Hartwig “In this way, it may often be easier for many 
people to go without their own car.”
Fewer vehicles will be in use for package delivery services as well. In addition, decreased 
traffic volume and an automatic assessment of the traffic situation result in better time 
management and fewer traffic jams. In addition, in a digital traffic system, vehicles can 
proactively adapt their speed to the traffic situation and find parking and stopping spaces 
without search traffic. Self-driving modes thus transform the cityscape hand in hand with 
digitalization. In addition, fewer vehicles means less resource consumption elsewhere.More space for people, less space for transport, less 
resource consumptionThe Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

49
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsThe risks of data misuse 
and access opportunities
Automation and networking of transport also entail risks. If 
motor vehicles with self-driving mode are improperly used, 
the worst would be increased traffic volume, increased 
emissions, and unequal mobility opportunities. In addition, 
manufacturers must do everything they can to prevent 
possible hacker attacks on vehicles and to ensure the 
security of the data. Motor vehicles with a self-driving 
mode can be misused for data collection and could be 
attractive targets for hackers. A look at China reveals further 
risks: China is currently testing a rating system with social 
points for all Chinese citizens, which could also decide on 
their access to public mobility services. The possibilities of 
abuse of this kind must be effectively and comprehensively 
counteracted in the USA by consistent regulations for 
data protection and data security. Research into motor 
vehicles with self-driving modes also increases the need 
for discussion for the possibilities of abuse and possible 
solutions to such issues.
The Goal: More sustainable, safer, and efficient mobility for all Next chapter  

50
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIn Conclusion:
A new mobility landscape?
Self-driving valet parking, self-driving public transit shuttles, as well as 
self-driving DHL Packstations and street cleaners – there are numerous 
possibilities.
As mentioned above, at present motor vehicles with self-driving mode cannot 
overcome every possible traffic situation without human intervention. Certain situational 
circumstances will continue to require human control. Drivers are still needed on the 
highway at high speeds or at least in dense city traffic.
Next chapter  

51
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsIn a few years, however, there will be self-driving modes 
that are capable of handling more and more traffic 
situations without the intervention of the driver. In close 
cooperation with a digital surrounding environment 
system, for example, they will be able to enter and 
exit a parking garage and park in one of the available 
parking spaces (self-driving valet parking). Various 
locally and functionally limited deployment scenarios are 
conceivable in passenger traffic as well. Over the years, 
the areas and fields of application will continue to grow. 
With self-driving taxis (robo-taxis) in limited operational 
areas, sharing providers may be able to largely cover 
their current business areas within 20 years and thus 
complement their car-sharing offer. There could even be 
a combination: If you want to drive the robo-taxi yourself, 
you can scan your driver license and get started. Through 
multimodality and the digitalization of communications 
(apps and mobility centers), motor vehicles with self-
driving modes can become part of high-performance 
public transit with door-to-door mobility. Buses with 
drivers will continue to handle traffic on the main routes 
on the highway and in dense city traffic. Streetcars and 
commuter trains are also (in part) suitable for the use of 
self-driving modes.In Conclusion: A new mobility landscape? Next chapter  

52
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsYou will not be able to buy a car for quite some time that 
is able to overcome every conceivable traffic situation, 
including on ordinary roads, without human intervention. 
However, passenger cars in private transport will soon be 
available for sale with situationally limited functions such 
as self-driving valet parking or highly automated driving 
on the highway. Perhaps in the next few years, cities and 
municipalities will also equip (individual distinct) areas 
with digital surrounding environment systems that allow 
self-driving mode for all public transit. Correspondingly 
equipped private cars could then possibly use such 
systems for a fee. In complex, dangerous traffic situations 
– such as on highways or in dense city traffic – in private 
vehicles with self-driving mode, drivers will still have to 
control the vehicle for quite some time.Outlook for private 
transportIn Conclusion: A new mobility landscape? Next chapter  

53
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsLikewise, the use of vehicles with self-driving mode in the field of commercial vehicles and 
company transport offers many opportunities. For example, self-driving DHL Packstations or 
street cleaners that drive at night on empty roads to their job site are certainly conceivable. 
Such applications may be possible in just a few years as they do not require high speeds 
and would therefore be easier to implement. In addition, a variety of operational applications 
for motor vehicles with self-driving mode are conceivable. In the near future, ports will be 
handled by self-driving cranes, forklifts, and transport vehicles and in warehouses, motor 
vehicles with self-driving modes will soon become part of everyday life. A few years ago, 
airports began to gain experience with self-driving vehicles not only in passenger transport, 
but also in baggage handling. The potential for safety, sustainability, and efficiency through 
autonomous driving functions are high in these areas.
The relevance of self-driving mode for traffic safety and their economic opportunities is 
very high. In addition, they are very promising in terms of gains in comfort and lifespan. 
Whether motor vehicles with autonomous driving functions will also fulfill their great potential 
for environmental and climate protection and whether they will keep the promise of equal 
mobility in less traffic and whether affordable and non-discriminatory mobility will be possible 
for all remains to be seen. It seems possible with a bit of political will. Motor vehicles with 
self-driving mode can then make a significant contribution to better mobility for all.Prospects for commercial vehicles and 
company transportNext chapter  

54
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsReferences
1 SAE J3016 Standard: https://www.sae.org/news/2019/01/sae-updates-j3016-automated-
driving-graphic (Accessed on: 05/23/2019)
2 https://dmv.ny.gov/dmv/apply-autonomous-vehicle-technology-demonstration-testing-
permit
3 NHTSA: https://www.nhtsa.gov/technology-innovation/automated-vehicles-safety
4 Department of Motor Vehicle of New York State; Autonomous Vehicle T echnology 
Demonstration/T esting Addendum (AV-2), https://dmv.ny.gov/forms/av2.pdf
5 U.S. Department of T ransportation: Preparing for the future of transportation – Automated 
Vehicles 3.0, p. 13; https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/policy-initiatives/
automated-vehicles/320711/preparing-future-transportation-automated-vehicle-30.pdf
6 Public Law 89-563, Sept. 9, 1966.
7 Title I Sec. 114, Public Law 89-563, Sept. 9, 1966.
8 Title I Sec. 102 (1), Public Law 89-563, Sept. 9, 1966.
9 U.S. Department of T ransportation: Preparing for the future of transportation – Automated 
Vehicles 3.0, p. iv; https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/policy-initiatives/
automated-vehicles/320711/preparing-future-transportation-automated-vehicle-30.pdf
10 U.S. Department of T ransportation, p. 13.
11 https://www.nhtsa.gov/technology-innovation/automated-vehicles-safety
12 NHTSA: Understanding NHTSA’s Regulatory T ools, p. 8, in reference to 49 U.S. C. § 30113 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/documents/understanding_nhtsas_current_
regulatory_tools-tag.pdf
13 U.S. Department of T ransportation: Preparing for the future of transportation – Automated 
Vehicles 3.0, p. iv; https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/policy-initiatives/
automated-vehicles/320711/preparing-future-transportation-automated-vehicle-30.pdf
14 https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/AV%20policy%20guidance%20PDF .
pdf
15 U.S. Department of T ransportation: Preparing for the future of transportation – Automated 
Vehicles 3.0, p. iv; https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/policy-initiatives/
automated-vehicles/320711/preparing-future-transportation-automated-vehicle-30.pdfNext chapter  

55
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsReferences
16 U.S. Department of T ransportation: Preparing for the future of transportation – Automated 
Vehicles 3.0, p. ix; https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/policy-initiatives/
automated-vehicles/320711/preparing-future-transportation-automated-vehicle-30.pdf
17 UN Sustainable Development Goal 3.6: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg3 (Accessed 
on: 05/23/2019).
18 https://www.nhtsa.gov/technology-innovation/automated-vehicles-safety
19 Title I Sec. 102 (1), Public Law 89-563, Sept. 9, 1966.
20 UN Sustainable Development Goal 8.2: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg8 (Accessed 
on: 05/23/2019).
21 Allied Market Research (2018): https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/press-release/
autonomous-vehicle-market.html (Accessed on: 05/23/2019).
22 U.S. Department of T ransportation: Preparing for the future of transportation – Automated 
Vehicles 3.0, p. ii; https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/policy-initiatives/
automated-vehicles/320711/preparing-future-transportation-automated-vehicle-30.pdf
23 E.g. EPA Clean Air Act Overview https://www.epa.gov/clean-air-act-overview/air-pollution-
current-and-future-challenges
24 UN Sustainable Development Goal 13.2: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg13 
(Accessed on: 05/23/2019).
25 UN Sustainable Development Goals 11.2 and 11.3: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/
sdg11 (Accessed on: 05/23/2019).
26 UN Sustainable Development Goals 5.1 and 10.2.
27 Less covered ground is a specific UN Sustainability Indicator 11.3.1.
56
E-book: Self-driving and cooperative carsImage directory
© Steven Han / Gettyimages
© J2R / Gettyimages
© BMW Group
© 7077’ / Eyeem
© Liao Xie / Gettyimages
© BMW Group
© Danny Hu / Gettyimages
© Fabian Plock / Gettyimages
© Bim / Gettyimages
© Yevgeniy Babichenmo / Gettyimages
© Adinda Fika / Unsplash
© T omasz Zajda / Gettyimages
© Bill Bonfield / Gettyimages
© Mareen Fischinger / Gettyimages
© Bim / Gettyimages
© Shi Jing / Gettyimages
© Yulia-Images / EyeEm
© Clu / Gettyimages
© Ferrantraite / Gettyimages
© Prasit photo / GettyimagesCover
Page 5
Page 7
Page 9
Page 11
Page 17
Page 25
Page 27
Page 27
Page 28
Page 31
Page 35
Page 37
Page 39
Page 41
Page 42
Page 46
Page 49
Page 50
Page 53T o the beginning  

Bayrische Motoren Werke AG 
Petuelring 130  
80788 Munich 
Germany
Phone: 0049 089 382 0 
Contact: 
  bmw.com/contactImprint
