=== Metadata ===
{
    "file_name": "Trajectory planning and tracking for autonomous overtaking.pdf",
    "file_path": "/Users/mf0016/Desktop/soe_RAG/resources/Trajectory planning and tracking for autonomous overtaking.pdf",
    "status": "Processed"
}

=== Content ===
Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Annual  Reviews  in Control  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/arcontrol  
Vision  article  
Trajectory  planning  and tracking  for autonomous  overtaking:  
State-of-the-art  and future  prospects  
Shilp Dixit a , ∗, Saber  Fallah  a , Umberto  Montanaro  a , Mehrdad  Dianati  b , Alan Stevens  c , 
Francis  Mccullough  d , Alexandros  Mouzakitis  e 
a Department  of Mechanical  Engineering  Sciences, University  of Surrey, Guildford,  Surrey GU2 7XH, United Kingdom  
b WMG, International  Manufacturing  Centre, University  of Warwick,  Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom  
c Transportation,  TRL, Wokingham,  Berks, RG40 3GA, United Kingdom  
d Electrical  Research Technology,  Jaguar Land Rover Limited, Coventry,  CV3 4LF, United Kingdom  
e Electrical,  Electronics  and Software Engineering,  Research & Technology,  Jaguar Land Rover Limited, Coventry,  CV3 4LF, United Kingdom  
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received  4 September  2017 
Revised 19 February  2018 
Accepted  20 February  2018 
Available  online 9 March 2018 
Keywords:  
Autonomous  vehicles 
Overtaking  
Trajectory  planning  
Trajectory  tracking 
Connected  vehicles a b s t r a c t 
Trajectory  planning  and trajectory  tracking  constitute  two important  functions  of an autonomous  over- 
taking system and a variety of strategies  have been proposed  in the literature  for both functionalities.  
However,  uncertainties  in environment  perception  using the current generation  of sensors has resulted  in 
most proposed  methods  being applicable  only during low-speed  overtaking.  In this paper, trajectory  plan- 
ning and trajectory  tracking  approaches  for autonomous  overtaking  systems  are reviewed.  The trajectory  
planning  techniques  are compared  based on aspects such as real-time  implementation,  computational  
requirements,  and feasibility  in real-world  scenarios.  This review shows that two important  aspects of 
trajectory  planning  for high-speed  overtaking  are: (i) inclusion  of vehicle dynamics  and environmental  
constraints  and (ii) accurate  knowledge  of the environment  and surrounding  obstacles.  The review of tra- 
jectory tracking  controllers  for high-speed  driving is based on different  categories  of control algorithms  
where their respective  advantages  and disadvantages  are analysed.  This study shows that while advanced  
control methods  improve  tracking  performance,  in most cases the results are valid only within well- 
regulated  conditions.  Therefore,  existing  autonomous  overtaking  solutions  assume precise knowledge  of 
surrounding  environment  which is not representative  of real-world  driving.  The paper also discusses  how 
in a connected  driving environment,  vehicles  can access additional  information  that can expand their 
perception.  Hence, the potential  of cooperative  information  sharing for aiding autonomous  high-speed  
overtaking  manoeuvre  is identiﬁed  as a possible  solution.  
© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
Contents  
1. Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 
2. System  architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78 
3. Trajectory  planning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 
4. Trajectory  tracking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81 
4.1. Tracking  controllers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82 
5. Conclusion.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84 
Acknowledgement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84 
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84 
∗Corresponding  author. 
E-mail addresses:  s.dixit@surrey.ac.uk  (S. Dixit), s.fallah@surrey.ac.uk  (S. Fallah), u.montanaro@surrey.ac.uk  (U. Montanaro),  m.dianati@warwick.ac.uk  (M. Dianati), 
astevens@trl.co.uk  (A. Stevens), fmccull2@jaguarlandrover.com  (F. Mccullough), amouzak1@jaguarlandrover.com  (A. Mouzakitis).  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2018.02.001  
1367-5788/© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 77 
1. Introduction  
Modern  cars are equipped  with various  sensors  and electronic  
systems  to reduce the workload  of a driver by providing  emer- 
gency assistance  (e.g., ABS, traction  control,  stability  control,  etc.), 
ADAS (e.g., cruise control,  lane keeping,  crosswind  assistance,  blind 
spot detection,  etc.), and navigational  assistance  (e.g., trip planning,  
route selection,  regular  traﬃc update,  etc.). However,  the next gen- 
eration  of intelligent  vehicles  are expected  to have increased  ca- 
pabilities  which allow automated  manoeuvring  in various  driving  
scenarios  ( Eskandarian,  2012; Gordon  & Lidberg,  2015 ). Overtaking  
is one of the most common  driving  manoeuvre  and any vehicle  ca- 
pable of end-to-end  autonomy  must have the ability to determine  
if, when, and how to perform  this driving  task. 
Overtaking  is a complex  driving  task as it involves  both lateral 
and longitudinal  motions  of an overtaking  vehicle  (subject  vehi- 
cle) while avoiding  collisions  with a slower moving  vehicle  (lead 
vehicle)  ( Milanés  et al., 2012 ). Additional  complexity  arises due 
to different  environmental  conditions  (e.g., road legislations,  vis- 
ibility, weather,  etc.) and diversity  of road-users  (e.g., small cars, 
buses, trucks, etc.) ( Vanholme,  Gruyer,  Lusetti,  Glaser, & Mammar,  
2013 ). Typically,  an overtaking  manoeuvre  is considered  success-  
ful on proper completion  of three sub-manoeuvres  namely,  (i) lane 
change  to overtaking  lane, (ii) pass lead vehicle(s),  and (iii) lane 
change  back to original  lane ( Petrov & Nashashibi,  2014 ). The lane 
change  sub-manoeuvre  which indicates  the start and the end of 
an overtake  can be classiﬁed  under two categories;  (i) Discre-  
tionary  Lane Change  (DLC) and (ii) Mandatory  Lane Change  (MLC) 
( Moridpour,  Rose, & Sarvi, 2010 ). A DLC sub-manoeuvre  is per- 
formed  when the immediate  traﬃc situation  in the faster lane 
is deemed  to be better than the current  lane and thus, the lane 
change  is performed  in anticipation  of an improvement  in the 
immediate  driving  conditions.  On the other hand, an MLC sub- 
manoeuvre  is performed  due to compulsion  arising from traﬃc 
rules (e.g., stalled vehicle,  need to follow desired  route, etc.). More- 
over, the lane change  to return back to the original  lane can also be 
either DLC or MLC based on traﬃc conditions  in each lane, legisla-  
tion, etc. thus, transforming  an overtaking  manoeuvre  into a com- 
plex task of dynamically  choosing  the best driving  lane based on 
(i) legislation,  (ii) driving  intentions,  and (iii) instantaneous  traﬃc 
situation.  This inference  that the choice of lane is affected  by both; 
(i) driving  intention,  and (ii) neighbourhood  traﬃc conditions  was 
veriﬁed  in Toledo,  Koutsopoulos,  and Ben-Akiva  (2003) using an 
integrated  model (combining  MLC and DLC) for lane changing  be- 
haviour  based on gap acceptance  (lead and lag gap). Therefore,  it is 
noted that due to the dynamic  nature of driving  environments  (i.e., 
traﬃc conditions  in original  and fast lane, speed limits, road con- 
ditions,  etc.) overtaking  is not standardised  manoeuvre  and thus, 
each overtaking  manoeuvre  in real-world  scenarios  is unique.  This 
uniqueness  arises from variations  in number  of overtaken  vehi- 
cles, duration  of overtake,  relative  velocity  between  concerned  ve- 
hicles, distance  between  concerned  vehicles,  etc ( Baber, Kolodko,  
Noel, Parent,  & Vlacic, 2005; Hegeman,  Brookhuis,  & Hoogendoorn,  
2005; Kesting,  Treiber,  & Helbing,  2007; Motro et al., 2016; Shamir,  
2004; Thiemann,  Treiber,  & Kesting,  2008; Vlahogianni,  2013; Web- 
ster, Suzuki,  Chung,  & Kuwahara,  2007 ). For an autonomous  vehi- 
cle, feasibility  of an overtaking  manoeuvre  is evaluated  on the ba- 
sis of safety based on subject  vehicle’s  states as well as surround-  
ing information  leading  to a discrete  outcome  for making  tactical  
decisions  (i.e., either perform  lane-change  or do not perform  lane 
change)  which form a part of planning  and decision  making  pro- 
cess. A variety  of techniques  for decision  making  are available  in 
literature  with (i) multi-level  decision  trees ( Claussmann,  Carvalho,  
& Schildbach,  2015 ), (ii) probabilistic  weighted  comparison  of con- 
current  goals ( Ardelt, Coester,  & Kaempchen,  2012 ), and (iii) higher award seeking  Markovian  Decision  Process  algorithms  ( Ulbrich  & 
Maurer,  2015 ) being among  the prominent  methods.  
A schematic  representation  of an overtaking  manoeuvre  is 
shown in Fig. 1 with each sub-manoeuvre  labelled  with roman 
numerals.  As discussed  above, the lane change  back to the origi- 
nal lane depends  on the traﬃc conditions  and thus both possibil-  
ities are depicted  in the schematic.  Despite  the innumerable  vari- 
ations present  due to the factors discussed  above, overtaking  ma- 
noeuvres  can be classiﬁed  under the four categories  listed below 
( Hegeman  et al., 2005 ): 
• Normal:  The subject  vehicle  approaches  the lead vehicle  and 
waits for a suitable  opportunity  to perform  the manoeuvre.  
• Flying: The subject  vehicle  does not adjust its longitudinal  ve- 
locity and is directly  able to overtake  the lead vehicle.  
• Piggy backing:  The subject  vehicle  follows  a preceding  vehicle  
as they both overtake  the lead vehicle.  
• 2 + : The subject  vehicle  overtakes  two or more lead vehicles  in 
a single manoeuvre.  
For the aforementioned  scenarios,  the duration  of a completed  
overtake  has been found to be in the range of 5.4 to 12.5 s (subject  
to dynamic  nature of the surrounding  traﬃc and environment)  us- 
ing recording  the trajectories  of vehicles  on typical European  high- 
ways ( Jong, Park, Chao, & Yen, 2016; Kanaris,  Kosmatopoulos,  & 
Ioannou,  2001; Khodayari,  Ghaffari,  Ameli, & Flahatgar,  2010; Mi- 
lanés et al., 2012; Valldorf  & Gessner,  2005; Vlahogianni,  2013; 
Wan, Raksincharoensak,  Maeda,  & Nagai, 2011 ). Performing  an au- 
tonomous  overtaking  manoeuvre  based on any of scenarios  men- 
tioned above within a given time range requires  accurate  infor- 
mation  of surrounding  environment,  traﬃc, and weather  condi- 
tions along with sophisticated  sensing  and perception,  planning,  
and control  systems  ( Chu, Lee, & Sunwoo,  2012 ). The surrounding  
environment  of a vehicle  is populated  by different  f eatures;  (i) per- 
manent  (road and lane limits),  (ii) slowly changing  (e.g., temporary  
speed limits, road works, traﬃc density,  etc.), and (iii) fast chang-  
ing (surrounding  vehicle  velocity,  position,  heading,  etc.). A mod- 
ern day vehicle  uses a host of on-board  sensors  to discern  the en- 
vironment  and the placement  of an on-board  sensor suite used to 
perform  this task can be seen in Fig. 2 . The information  from these 
sensors  is combined  and used for tasks such as; (i) classify  objects,  
(ii) track stationary  and moving  obstacles,  (iii) identify  safe driv- 
ing zones, etc. Currently,  there are some production  vehicles  that 
utilise vehicle-to-everything  (V2X) information  to provide  updates  
on permanent  (e.g., road and lane limits, road inclination,  etc.) or 
slowly changing  features  (e.g., temporary  speed limits, road works, 
traﬃc updates,  etc.) of surrounding  environment  via a combination  
of cellular  data and Local Dynamic  Map (LDM) updates.  However,  
despite  an elaborate  sensor suite and ﬁrst generation  V2X commu-  
nication  systems  the capabilities  of the contemporary  autonomous  
vehicles  is limited  to low-speed  overtaking.  This is due to limita- 
tions such as; (i) range of sensors,  (ii) blind spots, (iii) small time- 
scales for predicting  motion  of traﬃc participants,  (iv) sensor im- 
perfections,  and (v) possible  V2X network  outages.  The combina-  
tion of one or more of these limitations  result in signiﬁcant  uncer- 
tainty while planning  complex  highway  manoeuvres  (e.g., overtak-  
ing) which span several  seconds  at high-speeds  ( Aeberhard  et al., 
2015; Son, Kim, Lee, & Chung,  2015 ). Moreover,  unless all the traﬃc 
participants  are connected  and autonomous  the uncertainty  arising 
from predicting  the motion  of traﬃc vehicles  cannot be brought  
down to negligible  levels even with the advent of perfect  on-board  
sensors  and/or V2X communication  network.  Thus, predicting  the 
motion  of traﬃc participants  for risk assessment  forms a vital part 
of manoeuvre  planning  and this domain  has witnessed  a lot of 
research  and a large number  of techniques  are present  in liter- 
ature. The different  methods  for motion  planning  for intelligent  
78 S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 
SV LV
safe approaching distancesafe lateral distanceDirection of Travel
(i)(ii)
(iii.a)(iii.b)
Traﬃc
safe merging distance
Fig. 1. Basic schematic  of an overtaking  manoeuvre.  Note: Different  sub-manoeuvres  are ( i ) lane-change;  ( ii ) pass lead vehicle; ( iii.a ) merge back into original lane; ( iii.b ) 
continue  in faster lane to pass traﬃc. 
Fig. 2. Visibility  of an autonomous  vehicle. Note: SV: Subject Vehicle, TV: Traﬃc Vehicle. Sensor performance  speciﬁcations  are based on Radar, 2018 . 
autonomous  vehicles  based on abstraction  levels of traﬃc motion  
are classiﬁed  as; (i) Physics-based  ( Schubert  et al., 2011; Schubert,  
Richter,  & Wanielik,  2008; Schubert,  Schulze,  & Wanielik,  2010 ), (ii) 
Manoeuvre-based  ( Eggert,  Klingelschmitt,  & Damerow,  2015 ), and 
(iii) Interaction-aware  ( Bahram,  Hubmann,  Lawitzky,  Aeberhard,  & 
Wollherr,  2016; Lawitzky  et al., 2013 ). A comprehensive  survey dis- 
cussing  the advantages  and limitations  of each of these techniques  
is presented  in Lefèvre,  Vasquez,  and Laugier  (2014) and an inter- 
ested reader is directed  towards  it. 
Recent research  has highlighted  the potential  use of off-board  
information  via V2X communications  in expanding  the sensory  
and perception  horizon  of a vehicle  through  the communication  
systems  ( Andrews,  2012; Guzzella,  2009; Luo, Xiang, Cao, & Li, 
2016 ). In the context  of autonomous  overtaking,  initial research  
has been largely focused  on the integration  of V2X information  
to: (i) manoeuvre  feasibility  check, and (ii) decision  making  stages 
( Hegeman  et al., 2005; Luo et al., 2016; Motro et al., 2016 ). How- 
ever, the potential  enhancements  that can be achieved  in trajec- 
tory planning  and trajectory  tracking  of an overtaking  manoeuvre  
by exploiting  V2X information  are yet to be studied.  In this pa- 
per, a review of various  techniques  for trajectory  planning  and tra- 
jectory  tracking  for autonomous  overtaking  systems  is presented.  
The aim of this paper is twofold:  (i) to gain insight  on techniques  
suitable  for autonomous  overtaking  systems,  and (ii) to investigate  
how V2X information  can enhance  both trajectory  planning  and 
tracking  techniques  of an autonomous  overtaking  system.  
The paper is structured  as follows:  Section  2 introduces  the sys- 
tem overview  of an autonomous  driving  system  and discusses  how 
a 2-tier control  architecture  can be used to perform  autonomous  
overtaking.  In Section  3 , an extensive  literature  review of trajec- 
tory planning  methods  used for generating  overtaking  trajectories  
is presented.  Comparison  of key aspects  pertaining  to vehicle  mod- 
els and a review of different  control  strategies  for trajectory  track- 
ing applications  is performed  in Section  4 . Finally,  the concluding  
remarks  are presented  in Section  5 . 2. System  architecture  
An autonomous  overtaking  manoeuvre  requires  consideration  of 
a variety  of factors such as subject  vehicle  states and constraints,  
lead vehicle  states, environment  limits, safety, and comfort.  An 
overview  of an intelligent  autonomous  driving  system  capable  of 
performing  autonomous  overtaking  is shown in Fig. 3 . For an au- 
tonomous  vehicle  to successfully  perform  different  tasks (e.g., lane 
change,  pass lead vehicle,  and merge)  pertaining  to overtaking,  it 
is expected  that the vehicle  can carry out each sub-task  within the 
sensing  and perception,  planning,  and control  blocks.  Sensing  and 
perception  includes  gathering  information  about the driving  con- 
ditions  to determine  if and when the conditions  are favourable  to 
perform  the overtaking  ( Kanaris  et al., 2001 ). An autonomous  vehi- 
cle utilises  information  from on-board  sensors  (Radar,  LiDAR, cam- 
era, etc.) and/or off-board  information  via V2X communications  to 
generate  a real-time  environmental  representation  ( Kim, Kim, Park, 
Jung, & Yi, 2016 ), see Fig. 3 . The main objectives  of the sensing  
and perception  system  are lane-level  localisation,  neighbouring  ve- 
hicle detection,  static obstacle/constraint  detection  and safe driv- 
able area representation  ( Kim et al., 2016 ). 
The planning  module  utilises  the perception  information  along 
with the subject  vehicle  states and dynamic  constraints  to compute  
safe collision  free local trajectory  for the subject  vehicle  at each 
time instant  ( Katrakazas,  Quddus,  Chen, & Deka, 2015 ). To plan an 
overtaking  manoeuvre  the vehicle  uses perception  data (position  
and velocity  estimates  of neighbouring  vehicles,  infrastructure  lim- 
its, road geometry,  headway  time) and subject  vehicle  data (cur- 
rent state, lateral and longitudinal  dynamics)  to check feasibility  of 
the manoeuvre  and design a collision  free and safe local reference  
trajectory  for an overtaking  manoeuvre  ( Carvalho,  Lefévre,  Schild-  
bach, Kong, & Borrelli,  2015; Glaser, Vanholme,  Mammar,  Gruyer,  & 
Nouvelière,  2010; Kala & Warwick,  2013; Kitazawa,  2016; Milanés  
et al., 2012; Saengpredeekorn  & Srinonchat,  2009; Shamir,  2004 ). 
The local trajectory  generated  via the planning  module  is used 
as a reference  trajectory  to be tracked  while performing  an over- 
S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 79 
Data Processing Send/Receive SensorsSensing and Perception
Planning/Decision
ControlCollision Free TrajectoryVehicle DynamicsV2X
Environment
Representation
Local Reference Trajectory
Trajectory Tracking Controller
ActuatorsActuator InputsPath PlannerOﬀ-board information
Fig. 3. Overview  of an autonomous  driving system. 
VehicleTrajectory tracking control
Inner-loop Control
Estimationτref
δrefTrajectory planning control
Trajectory Update
Localization LDM
GPSV2Xvref
Xref,Yreflongitudinal speed
& Actuation
e.g., yaw-rate, acceleration, velocity, etc. e.g., heading angle, position, etc.reference ( vx,des)
Fig. 4. General control architecture  for an autonomous  vehicle ( Gao et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2016; Kitazawa,  2016; Naranjo et al., 2008; Nilsson et al., 2014 ). (V2X block with 
dot–dash  boundary:  optional functionality).  
take (e.g., lane change,  pass lead vehicle,  lane-merge),  and a 
closed-loop  control  system  is designed  to track it by controlled  
manipulation  of steering,  throttle  and/or brake ( Carvalho,  Gao, 
Gray, Tseng, & Borrelli,  2013; Gao, Gray, Tseng, & Borrelli,  2014; 
Kala & Warwick,  2013; Kitazawa,  2016; Milanés  et al., 2012; Mur- 
govski & Sjöberg,  2015; Petrov & Nashashibi,  2014; Saengpre-  
deekorn  & Srinonchat,  2009; Schildbach  & Borrelli,  2015; Shamir,  
2004 ). 
To preserve  the modular  nature of the architecture  presented  
in the section  above, the different  driving  tasks can be trans- 
lated to a control  architecture  for an autonomous  vehicle  as shown 
in Fig. 4 , i.e. trajectory  planning  controller  and trajectory  track- 
ing controller  ( Gao et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2016; Kitazawa,  2016; 
Naranjo,  González,  García, & De Pedro, 2008; Nilsson,  Gao, Car- 
valho, & Borrelli,  2014 ). The objective  of the trajectory  planning  
controller  is to perceive  the environment,  monitor  vehicle  states 
(longitudinal  and lateral positions,  longitudinal  and lateral veloci- 
ties, longitudinal  and lateral accelerations,  and heading)  and com- 
pute safe trajectories  (e.g., X ref , Y ref , and v ref ) for the vehicle  to 
track ( Glaser et al., 2010 ). The trajectory  tracking  controller  then 
computes,  via feedback  algorithms  based on the tracking  error, the 
necessary  torque ( τref ) and steering  inputs ( δref ) required  to track 
the reference,  despite  possible  measurement  noise, un-modelled  dynamics,  parametric  uncertainties  which may or may not be ac- 
counted  for by the trajectory  planning  controller.  
3. Trajectory  planning  
An autonomous  vehicle  relies on real-time  vehicle  state and en- 
vironment  information  (e.g., surrounding  vehicles,  road conditions)  
to derive a local trajectory  that ensures  a safe passage  while min- 
imising  the deviation  from the overall journey  trajectory  (global  
trajectory).  Local trajectory  planning  can be deﬁned  as –real-time  
planning  of the vehicle’s  transition  from one feasible  state to the next 
while satisfying  the vehicle’s  kinematic  limits based on vehicle dynam-  
ics and constrained  by occupant  comfort,  lane boundaries  and traﬃc 
rules, while, at the same time, avoiding  obstacles  ( Katrakazas  et al., 
2015 ). Technical  literature  shows that the vast majority  of trajec- 
tory planning  methods  for an overtaking  application  employ  one 
of the four well known  techniques  i.e., potential  ﬁelds, cell de- 
composition,  interdisciplinary  methods  and optimal  control.  In this 
section,  these techniques  are reviewed  to gain insight  into their 
performance  for different  speciﬁcations  such as computational  re- 
quirements,  safety, feasibility  in high-speed  overtaking  and real- 
time implementation.  
80 S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 
Fig. 5. Trajectory  planning  via (a) potential  ﬁelds ( Kitazawa,  2016 ); (b) RRT ( Khaksar, Sahari, & Hong, 2016 ); (c) virtual reference  tracking ( Petrov & Nashashibi,  2014 ); (d) 
Model Predictive  Control ( Carvalho  et al., 2013 ). 
Potential  ﬁeld algorithms  assign repulsive  ﬁelds to obstacles  
and attractive  ﬁelds to safe zones of the vehicle  and then use an 
algorithm  to compute  trajectories  along the steepest  potential  gra- 
dient in the resulting  ﬁeld ( Glaser et al., 2010; Kitazawa,  2016 ), see 
Fig. 5 (a). The computed  path is guaranteed  to follow the lowest 
potential  (i.e., ﬁnd collision  free trajectory)  in a given space but its 
safety and accuracy  depends  heavily  on the accuracy  of the gen- 
erated potential  ﬁeld (i.e., deﬁnite  knowledge  of position  of sta- 
tionary  and moving  obstacles).  However,  due to the high compu-  
tation costs and need for very accurate  surrounding  environment  
information,  the method  has only been experimentally  veriﬁed  for 
low speed (i.e., urban) manoeuvres  ( Kitazawa,  2016 ). Additionally,  
it is seen that the algorithm  cannot handle  vehicle  kinematic  con- 
straints  which may cause safety issues in high-speed  driving  sce- 
narios ( Glaser et al., 2010; Shim, Adireddy,  & Yuan, 2012 ). 
Cell decomposition  algorithms  such as Rapidly-exploring  Ran- 
dom Tree (RRT) is a method  used for collision  free path planning  
( Kuwata,  Fiore, Teo, Frazzoli,  & How, 2008; Ma et al., 2014 ), see 
Fig. 5 (b). These algorithms  can be modiﬁed  to incorporate  the vehi- 
cle constraints  but they also suffer from computational  and mem- 
ory costs ( Glaser et al., 2010; Kuwata  et al., 2008; Ma et al., 2014 ). 
The computational  complexity  of such algorithms  increases  with 
increasing  traﬃc density  and frequency  of road curvature  thus 
jeopardising  the on-board  computation  of an autonomous  vehicle  
on busy roads ( Ma et al., 2014 ). Furthermore,  the paths created  by 
RRT’s are jerky and tracking  such a trajectory  will have an adverse  
effect on the comfort  of the occupants  ( Katrakazas  et al., 2015 ). 
Inter-disciplinary  techniques  inspired  by robotics  and missile  
guidance  systems  ( Ghumman,  Kunwar,  & Benhabib,  2008; Petrov 
& Nashashibi,  2014; Usman  & Kunwar,  2009 ) for vehicle  path- 
planning  are also reported  in literature.  One of the novel ap- 
proaches  proposed  was to use motion  primitives  (combination  
of steady-state  equilibrium  trajectories  and pre-speciﬁed  manoeu-  
vres) ( Gray et al., 2012 ). The experimental  results demonstrated  
that collision  free and feasible  trajectories  can be generated  in real- 
time using this approach  ( Gray et al., 2012 ). Ghumman  et al. de- 
signed a trajectory  planning  method  based on Rendezvous  Guid- 
ance technique  (passing  vehicle  is guided  in real-time  to match the 
position  and velocity  of a shadow  target during an overtaking  ma- 
noeuvre)  inspired  from missile  guidance  systems  ( Ghumman  et al., 
2008; Usman  & Kunwar,  2009 ), see Fig. 5 (c). Similarly,  an approach  
for overtaking  manoeuvre  consisting  of consecutive  tracking  of vir- tual reference  points positioned  a priori at known  distances  from 
the lead vehicle  is proposed  in Petrov and Nashashibi  (2014) . Sim- 
ulation  results of both these approaches  demonstrated  acceptable  
real-time  capabilities  for generating  feasible  trajectories  but track- 
ing performance  was validated  using low order models  in com- 
puter simulations.  Thus, in the absence  of experimental  valida-  
tion it is diﬃcult  to form conclusions  on the eﬃcacy  of such ap- 
proaches.  
Optimal  control  methods  minimise  a performance  index (e.g., 
change  in kinetic energy,  Shamir,  2004 ; jerk, Chu et al., 2012; Shim 
et al., 2012 ; lateral acceleration,  Shim et al., 2012 ) under a set of 
constraints  (e.g., vehicle  lateral and longitudinal  limits, environ-  
ment constraints,  neighbouring  vehicles)  to obtain a trajectory  for 
a safe overtaking  manoeuvre.  The results from literature  demon-  
strate that the method  is successful  in generating  collision  free 
trajectories  without  high computational  requirements  ( Chu et al., 
2012; Shamir,  2004; Shim et al., 2012 ). The autonomous  vehicle  
Junior developed  by Stanford  University  has successfully  demon-  
strated  the effectiveness  of optimal  control  based trajectory  plan- 
ning techniques  at the DARPA Urban Challenge  ( Werling,  Ziegler,  
Kammel,  & Thrun, 2010 ). In this control  framework,  the researchers  
design two sets of trajectories,  one for lateral motion  and an- 
other for longitudinal  motion  each optimised  for safety and oc- 
cupant  comfort.  A set of combined  lateral and longitudinal  mo- 
tion is obtained  by combining  these two sets. The ﬁnal trajectory  
that is provided  to the trajectory  tracking  controller  is computed  
by following  the steps; (i) ﬁlter out trajectories  that breach safety 
and comfort  limits to create a subset of applicable  trajectories,  (ii) 
use this subset of applicable  trajectories  to identify  ideal trajectory  
that minimises  deviation  from the road centre. However,  most of 
these techniques  do not take into account  the non-linearities  in 
the vehicle  and tire dynamics  resulting  in unfeasible  trajectories  
under high-speeds  and/or low road friction  conditions  which pose 
a safety risk for autonomous  vehicles  ( Gao et al., 2012 ). Addition-  
ally, trajectories  obtained  by such open-loop  single stage optimi-  
sation do not account  for uncertainties  in a dynamic  environment  
and therefore  these trajectory  planning  methods  have limited  po- 
tential unless used in either extremely  controlled  or structured  en- 
vironments.  
Recently,  Model Predictive  Control  (MPC) methodology  has also 
been used by researchers  for local trajectory  planning,  due to 
its ability to better handle  system  constraints  and nonlinearities,  
S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 81 
see Fig. 5 (d). The approach  involves  solving  a constrained  ﬁnite- 
time optimal  control  problem  to determine  a sequence  of con- 
trol inputs that minimise  a performance  index (cost function)  and 
applying  the optimal  inputs (e.g., steering  wheel angle, throttle,  
and brake) using a receding  horizon  principle  ( Carvalho  et al., 
2013 ). However,  the presence  of (i) nonlinear  vehicle  dynamics,  
and (ii) time-varying  state and input constraints  while navigat-  
ing in a dynamic  environment,  leads to a nontrivial  control  prob- 
lem thus presenting  a computational  burden  to solve the opti- 
misation  problem  in real-time  ( Carvalho  et al., 2013 ). Researchers  
have attempted  to reduce the computational  complexity  arising 
due to the nonlinear  vehicle  dynamics  by using (i) point mass ve- 
hicle model ( Kim et al., 2016; Murgovski  & Sjöberg,  2015; Nils- 
son et al., 2014 ), (ii) linear kinematic  bicycle  vehicle  model ( Gao 
et al., 2012; Gao et al., 2014; Schildbach  & Borrelli,  2015 ) and (iii) 
iterative  linearisation  of nonlinear  vehicle  model ( Carvalho  et al., 
2013 ), in the prediction  model. It is noted that the collision  avoid- 
ance constraints  are non-convex  in nature which means that the 
feasibility  and uniqueness  of the optimisation  cannot be guar- 
anteed.  Researchers  have proposed  different  techniques  (translat-  
ing problem  from time-dependent  system  to position-dependent  
system  ( Gao et al., 2012; Karlsson,  Murgovski,  & Sjöberg,  2016; 
Kim et al., 2016; Murgovski  & Sjöberg,  2015 ), relaxing  collision  
avoidance  constraints  ( Nilsson  et al., 2014 ), approximate  lineari-  
sation ( Carvalho  et al., 2013 ) to guarantee  uniqueness  of solution  
and reduce the computing  and memory  requirements  of the con- 
troller. The experimental  results demonstrate  the ability of these 
approaches  to generate  safe collision  free trajectories  around  static 
or moving  obstacles  (i.e. overtaking  manoeuvre)  but it should be 
noted that these path-planner  methods  required  exact knowledge  
of the states, the obstacles  (stationary,  moving)  and/or a high per- 
formance  computing  platform  (desktop  class computer)  to calcu- 
late safe collision  free trajectories  ( Carvalho  et al., 2013; Gao et al., 
2012, 2014; Kim et al., 2016; Murgovski  & Sjöberg,  2015; Nils- 
son et al., 2014; Schildbach  & Borrelli,  2015 ). It is noteworthy  
that recent publications  have demonstrated  that computing  con- 
straints  may soon become  an issue of the past as highly eﬃcient  
algorithms  for implementing  MPC controllers  on real-time  pro- 
totyping  systems  and vehicle  electronic  control  units have been 
developed  and a few successful  implementations  are discussed  
in Cesari, Schildbach,  Carvalho,  and Borrelli  (2017) , Kong, Pfeif- 
fer, Schildbach,  and Borrelli  (2015) , Schildbach  and Gmbh (2016) . 
Among  the reviewed  approaches,  MPC provides  a promising  ap- 
proach  for trajectory  planning  due to its ability to: (i) include  sys- 
tem dynamics  and constraints,  and (ii) perform  receding  horizon  
control  which allows it to plan feasible  trajectories  over a larger 
operating  range. 
It is noteworthy  that all methods  discussed  above operate  un- 
der the assumption  that accurate  knowledge  of the environment  
and lead vehicle  states are available  on-demand  to the trajectory  
planning  system.  The advantages  and disadvantages  of the various  
trajectory  planning  methods  discussed  above are summarised  in 
Table 1 . However,  due to limitations  of on-board  sensing  systems,  
the following  situations  may arise. First, the measurements  of the 
lead vehicle  states (e.g., position,  velocity,  and heading)  might have 
errors, missing  information,  low accuracy,  etc. resulting  in inac- 
curate environmental  representation.  Second,  variations  in exter- 
nal conditions  (e.g., road legislation,  road surface  condition,  road 
width, weather,  etc.) which are not captured  might impact  the sub- 
ject vehicle  dynamic  limits (e.g., lateral acceleration,  longitudinal  
speed, lateral acceleration,  etc.). Trajectory  planning  methods  that 
are not robust to environmental  variations  and sensor inaccura-  
cies might lead to unfeasible  and/or unsafe reference  trajectories,  
posing a major safety risk especially  during high-speed  driving.  
The various  trajectory  planning  techniques  discussed  above pro- 
pose different  ways for dealing  with the uncertainty  in current  environment  perception  and limited  future prediction  capabilities.  
Potential  ﬁeld and cell decomposition  based methods  assign ad- 
ditional  buffer zones (based on headway  time, instantaneous  rel- 
ative velocity,  etc.) around  each obstacle  and thus the search for 
feasible  trajectories  is performed  in a constrained  search space 
( Wolf & Burdick,  2008 ). Similarly,  the trajectory  planning  tech- 
niques in Petrov and Nashashibi  (2014) , Usman  and Kunwar  (2009) , 
Ghumman  et al. (2008) also compute  virtual target points conser-  
vatively  by expanding  the margins  of the virtual reference  points in 
accordance  with the relative  velocities  of the subject  and lead ve- 
hicle. On the other hand, a type of MPC control  technique  known  
as Scenario-Based  MPC (SCMPC)  has been proposed  in literature  
to mitigate  the uncertainty  arising due to traﬃc interactions  in a 
systematic  manner  ( Carvalho,  Gao, Lefevre,  & Borrelli,  2014; Cesari 
et al., 2017; Schildbach  & Borrelli,  2015; Schildbach,  Fagiano,  Frei, 
& Morari,  2014 ). In this approach  either an interaction-aware  traﬃc 
prediction  model ( Schildbach  & Borrelli,  2015 ) or manoeuvre  based 
traﬃc prediction  model ( Cesari et al., 2017 ) is incorporated  within 
the MPC framework  to simulate  traﬃc scenarios  as a probability  
distribution  and a ﬁnite horizon  optimal  control  problem  is solved 
to generate  a trajectory  that is safe, feasible,  and admissible  un- 
der a selected  set of traﬃc scenarios.  The eﬃcacy  of the SCMPC  
trajectory  planning  technique  for generating  safe lane change  ma- 
noeuvres  has been demonstrated  numerically  and its real-time  ca- 
pability  has been experimentally  validated  ( Carvalho  et al., 2014; 
Cesari et al., 2017; Schildbach  & Borrelli,  2015; Schildbach  et al., 
2014 ). However,  the effectiveness  of this method  has a dependence  
on the accuracy  of the modelled  traﬃc scenarios  which makes ob- 
taining  large quantity  of actual traﬃc data a necessity.  Recently,  
it has been proposed  by researchers  that a V2X communication  
system  can augment  a vehicles  sensing  and perception  capabili-  
ties to potentially  mitigate  the issues discussed  above ( Damerow,  
Flade, & Eggert,  2016; Hegeman  et al., 2005; Luo et al., 2016; Motro 
et al., 2016; Ohara, Slot, Monteil,  Cahill, & Bouroche,  2015; Schild-  
bach & Borrelli,  2015 ). Initial studies  for trajectory  planning  us- 
ing the information  obtained  through  V2X systems,  suggest  that 
the safety and feasibility  of a manoeuvre  can be enhanced  by in- 
corporating  off-board  information  ( Huang,  Wu, Ma, & Fan, 2015; 
Pérez, Milanés,  Onieva,  Godoy,  & Alonso,  2011; You et al., 2015 ). 
Nonetheless,  tangible  beneﬁts  of using off-board  information  (e.g., 
lead vehicle  states, road conditions,  etc.) in trajectory  planning  
methods  are not very clearly understood  and thus such studies  
are open to further  research.  Nonetheless,  how a V2X system  ca- 
pable of providing  accurate  surrounding  (e.g., lead vehicle  states, 
road conditions,  etc.) information  in real-time  can improve  trajec- 
tory planning  methods  needs to be understood  and is a question  
open to further  research.  Moreover,  a wireless  information  shar- 
ing system  induces  additional  dynamics  related  to communication  
delays, packet losses, and connection  drop-outs  which adds to the 
complexity  of a control  system  ( Wymeersch,  De Campos,  Falcone,  
Svensson,  & Ström, 2015 ). Therefore,  meticulous  studies  are re- 
quired to ensure that the trajectory  planning  methods  are robust 
and fault-tolerant  against  such network  imperfections  ( Houben  & 
Houben,  2015 ). 
4. Trajectory  tracking  
Vehicle  trajectory  tracking  (lateral-longitudinal  control)  is a ma- 
ture scientiﬁc  ﬁeld with a plethora  of control  methodologies  avail- 
able in literature  dating all the way back to the middle  of the 20th 
century.  Some useful properties  for assessing  tracking  controllers  
for autonomous  vehicle  applications  are listed below ( Watzenig  & 
Brandstätter,  2017 ). 
82 S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 
Table 1 
Summary  of techniques  for trajectory  planning  to avoid a moving obstacle.  
Control strategy Strength(s)  Weakness  
Potential  ﬁelds • Optimality  of searched  path guaranteed  
• Collision  free path guaranteed  • High computation  cost 
• Inability to handle system constraints  
• No systematic  procedure  to consider environmental  
uncertainties  
Cell decomposition  • Guaranteed  collision free trajectories  • Computation  requirements  sensitive  to traﬃc density 
• Computed  paths are jerky 
• No systematic  procedure  to consider environmental  
uncertainties  
Interdisciplinary  techniques  • Reduced  complexity  of collision avoidance  as trajectory  
planning  converted  to reference  tracking problem 
• Real-time  capable • Experimentally  unproven  
• No systematic  design procedure  
• Do not consider uncertainties  in environment  perception  
while generating  reference  points 
Optimal control • Generate  collision free trajectories  
• Ability to include kinematic  constraints  • Unsuitable  for high-speed  driving manoeuvres  with large 
angles of tire slip 
• Inability to consider tire dynamics  
Model Predictive  Control (MPC) • Include vehicle and tire dynamics  
• Systematic  handling  of constraints  and traﬃc 
uncertainties  
• Computational  requirements  independent  of environment  • Optimisation  sensitive  to number of constraints  
• Computation  complexity  scales quickly with high-order  
system models, non-linearity,  and non-convexity  of 
constraints  
• Real-time  capability:  The control  law needs to be imple- 
mentable  on a vehicles  Electronic  Control  Unit (ECU) and func- 
tion within the calculation  time 
• Robustness:  The designed  controller  should be robust against  
system  nonlinearities,  model parameter  variations,  and external  
disturbances  
• Operating  Range:  The tracking  controller  should ideally work 
across the entire range of vehicle  speeds (0–120  km/h) 
• Controller  parameter  tuning:  A systematic  tuning procedure  for 
the controller  parameters  allows for a structured  controller  de- 
sign procedure  
The performance  of closed-loop  tracking  controllers  depends  on 
the accuracy  of the modelled  system  dynamics.  Vehicle  models  
used for capturing  the dynamics  should provide  a trade-off be-  
tween model accuracy  and ﬁdelity.  In literature  a variety  of vehicle  
models  (ranging  from low dimension  point mass-models  to high- 
ﬁdelity  multi-body  models)  are presented.  Different  vehicle  mod- 
els that have been developed  over the years to capture  the lon- 
gitudinal,  lateral and yaw dynamics  of a vehicle  have been doc- 
umented  in Rajamani  (2011) . Out of the wide variety  of vehicle  
models  available  in literature  a kinematic  bicycle  model and dy- 
namic bicycle  model have been found to provide  a good compro-  
mise between  model complexity  and accuracy  for controller  design 
related  to highway  driving  applications  ( Kang, Lee, & Chung,  2014; 
Kong et al., 2015 ). A comprehensive  review of trajectory  tracking  
control  on the aspects  of choice of vehicle  model, control  strate- 
gies, and controller  performance  criteria  has been performed  in 
Haﬁzah,  Hairi, Hudha,  and Abdul (2016) . The review demonstrated  
that geometric  models  based on Ackermann  steering  are not suit- 
able for high-speed  trajectory  tracking  due to their inability  to in- 
clude vehicle  dynamics  (e.g., acceleration  and velocity).  Addition-  
ally, it is highlighted  that kinematic  models  (bicycle,  four-wheel)  
are also unsuitable  for high-speed  trajectory  tracking  as they are 
inaccurate  in regions  of tire force saturation.  Both linear and non- 
linear dynamic  vehicle  models  (full vehicle  model, half vehicle  
model, and bicycle  model)  were found to mitigate  these limitations  
and furthermore  providing  a more accurate  representation  of a ve- 
hicle during high-speed  driving  ( Haﬁzah  et al., 2016 ). However,  it 
was also shown that a dynamic  bicycle  model (linear)  was suitable  
for driving  tasks (lane-change  manoeuvre,  overtaking  manoeuvre,  
highway  driving)  with small lateral acceleration  ( ≤0.5 g) and low 
vehicle  side-slip  angle (5 °) ( Haﬁzah  et al., 2016; Kim, Kim, & Lee, 
2015 ). Most of the papers in literature  have used a single-track  ve- hicle model (bicycle  model)  for developing  a tracking  controller  for 
performing  overtaking  manoeuvres  since an overtaking  manoeuvre  
is performed  well within the dynamic  limits of the vehicle  (i.e., lat- 
eral acceleration,  vehicle  side-slip,  and yaw-rate)  where both the 
vehicle  as well as tire dynamics  can be approximated  by linear 
models.  However,  at high-speeds  and/or under low road friction  
overtaking  scenarios,  it is quite possible  that the system  (i.e., ve- 
hicle, and tires) may exhibit  signiﬁcant  non-linear  behaviour  and 
therefore  for appropriate  scenarios  either nonlinear  models,  linear 
parameter  varying  (LPV) models  or multiple  models  can be used 
to capture  the relevant  dynamic  behaviour  of the system  ( Filev, 
Lu, & Hrovat,  2013; Kim et al., 2015 ). For a detailed  review of dif- 
ferent vehicle  models  the reader is directed  towards  the work by 
Haﬁzah  et al. (2016) , Snider (2009) , Sorniotti,  Barber,  and Pinto 
(2017) , Rupp and Stolz (2017) . 
4.1. Tracking  controllers  
A comparison  of different  tracking  controllers  for autonomous  
vehicles  was performed  in Haﬁzah  et al. (2016) , Snider (2009) , 
Sorniotti  et al. (2017) , Rupp and Stolz (2017) . Some relevant  obser- 
vations  of these comparisons  along with other examples  of track- 
ing controllers  for autonomous  overtaking  are discussed  below. 
Geometric  controllers  are designed  using geometric  vehicle  
models  ( Haﬁzah  et al., 2016; Rupp & Stolz, 2017; Snider, 2009; 
Sorniotti  et al., 2017 ). Pure-pursuit  and Stanley  method  are two 
prevalent  geometric  controllers  ( Haﬁzah  et al., 2016; Rupp & Stolz, 
2017; Snider, 2009; Sorniotti  et al., 2017 ). Pure-pursuit  is a tech- 
nique where the vehicle  is in constant  pursuit  of a virtual moving  
point in front of the vehicle  and ‘Stanley’  controller  is based on 
non-linear  geometric  controller  which considers  heading  and lat- 
eral error to compute  steering  angle corrections  ( Haﬁzah  et al., 
2016 ). These type of controllers  (pure pursuit,  Stanley,  etc.) are 
easy to implement  but are suitable  only for applications  that do 
not need to consider  vehicle  dynamics.  Furthermore,  since this 
approach  does not follow a systematic  control  parameter  tuning 
method,  it is diﬃcult  to achieve  a trade-off between  stability  and 
tracking  performance  ( Rupp & Stolz, 2017; Snider, 2009; Sorniotti  
et al., 2017 ). It is observed  that over-tuning  of both pure-pursuit  
and Stanley  controllers  leads to poor tracking  performance  dur- 
ing cornering  ( Snider, 2009 ). Kinematic  controllers  are alterna-  
tive control  techniques  for trajectory  tracking.  They are feedback  
controllers  which are designed  considering  the vehicle  kinemat-  
ics (e.g., longitudinal  velocity,  lateral velocity,  yaw-rate,  etc.). Kine- 
S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 83 
Table 2 
Summary  of control strategies  for vehicle trajectory  tracking ( Haﬁzah et al., 2016; Snider, 2009; Sorniotti  et al., 2017; Tagne et al., 2016; Watzenig  & Brandstätter,  2017 ). 
Control strategy Strength(s)  Weakness  
Geomteric  and kinematic  • Adequate  performance  (experimentally  validated)  in 
conditions  without disturbances  (e.g., wind, road banking)  
• Good tracking performance  and robustness  at moderate  
speeds (e.g., kinematic)  • Do not consider vehicle dynamics  
• Steady-state  error increases  for high-speed  driving (e.g., 
geometric)  
• Unsuitable  for high-speed  driving as dynamics  are 
neglected  (e.g., kinematic)  
• Requires  smooth and continuous  reference  trajectories  
Classical • Established  method with good performance  for 
non-linear  systems 
• Robust closed-loop  performance  against uncertainties  and 
noise (e.g., SMC) • Tuning of controller  parameters  is tricky (e.g., PID) 
• Robust performance  only in limited scenarios  (e.g., SMC) 
• Control law is sensitive  to path curvature  variations  (e.g., 
SMC) 
Dynamic  state feedback  • Consider  vehicle dynamics  in calculating  control law 
• Optimisation  shifted oﬄine resulting  in simple 
implementation  of control law • Obtaining  vehicle states (e.g., wheel forces, slip angles, 
torques etc.) is non-trivial  
• Control law is sensitive  to path curvature  variations  (e.g., 
LQR) 
Neural network • Suﬃcient  training can make the behaviour  very 
human-like  to make the automated  car feel natural • Controller  tuning requires simulation  with large amounts  
of real world (training)  data 
• No failure explanations  possible 
Fuzzy logic • Closed-loop  system acts similar to a human-driver  
(because  of human-like  rules) • Controller  tuning is not systematic  with no formal 
stability analysis 
• Rules can become unmanageable  if number of variables  
is large 
Model Predictive  Control (MPC) • Systematic  design procedure  
• Ability to include system and actuator constraints  in 
design procedure  
• Inclusion  of vehicle and tire dynamics  in control problem • Non-linear  MPCs with have high computing  requirements  
making them unsuitable  for high-speed  driving 
environments  
• The tracking performance  is sensitive  to the accuracy  of 
prediction  model 
• Larger tuning parameter  set compared  to industry 
standard  PID 
matic controllers  have been shown to improve  the tracking  perfor-  
mance provided  by geometric  controllers  but the gains over a ge- 
ometric  controllers  are not high enough  to justify the additional  
effort involved  in designing  and tuning the controller  ( Haﬁzah  
et al., 2016; Snider, 2009; Sorniotti  et al., 2017 ). Moreover,  since 
these methods  ignore vehicle  dynamics,  their applicability  in crit- 
ical driving  environments  (e.g., high-speed  driving,  extreme  path 
curvature,  etc.) cannot be assured.  
Examples  of classical  control  algorithms  (e.g., PID, sliding mode 
controller)  are also found in literature.  Tracking  controllers  using 
classical  techniques  (PID) are shown to have good tracking  per- 
formance  but tuning of the parameters  was found to be major 
challenge  due to the presence  of vehicle  and tire non-linearities.  
Sliding  Mode Control  (SMC), a well-established  classical  non-linear  
state-feedback  controller  has also been used to design vehicle  tra- 
jectory  tracking  controllers  and shows good tracking  accuracy  due 
to the non-linear  control  law ( Haﬁzah  et al., 2016; Tagne, Talj, & 
Charara,  2016 ). However,  it suffers from a few drawbacks  namely:  
(i) performance  is sensitive  to the sampling  rate of the controller  
(ii) chattering  problems,  (iii) robustness  only on the sliding sur- 
face, and (iv) needs prior knowledge  of disturbance  and uncer- 
tainty bounds  ( Haﬁzah  et al., 2016; Rupp & Stolz, 2017; Tagne et al., 
2016 ). 
Dynamic  state feedback  (linear and nonlinear)  based control  
methods  demonstrate  better performance  that geometric  and kine- 
matic controllers  as they consider  the dynamics  of the vehicle  and 
tires while computing  the control  law. Linear Quadratic  Regula-  
tor (LQR) based control  law is easy to design but while tracking  
trajectories  with varying  curvature  feedforward  control  is required  
to achieve  error-free  tracking.  However,  adding  feedforward  con- 
trol makes the tracking  controller  sensitive  to discontinuities  in the 
reference  trajectory  which requires  additional  tuning to attenuate  
( Snider, 2009 ). On the other hand, optimal  control  based methods  
can provide  accurate  trajectory  tracking  even at high-speeds  but 
this is achieved  only when certain  assumptions  (e.g., velocity  of 
the subject  vehicle  remains  constant  during the optimisation  hori- 
zon) are fulﬁlled.  Recently,  nonlinear  adaptive  control  techniques  such as Inversion  & Immersion  (I&I) have also been used for vehi- 
cle trajectory  tracking  controllers.  Initial studies  demonstrate  that 
this method  provides  robust closed-loop  tracking  performance  but 
the controller  is sensitive  to parameter  uncertainties  ( Tagne et al., 
2016 ). In the same body of work, an adaptive  Proportional-Integral  
(PI) with non-linear  gains controller  for trajectory  tracking  was 
also proposed  ( Tagne et al., 2016 ). Simulation  results indicate  that 
the controller  provides  tracking  performance  at par with an SMC 
and I&I controller  with added advantage  in the form of insensitiv-  
ity to parameter  uncertainties.  However,  in presence  of large cur- 
vature variations  or when operated  in non-linear  region of vehi- 
cle dynamics,  the controller  gains have a tendency  to become  high 
which may have a detrimental  effect on the actuators.  
There are also examples  of advanced  model based control  tech- 
niques such as MPC being used for vehicle  trajectory  tracking  
( Carvalho  et al., 2013; Gao et al., 2012; Gao et al., 2014; Gray et al., 
2012; Kim et al., 2016; Murgovski  & Sjöberg,  2015; Nilsson  et al., 
2014 ). Nonlinear  MPC was found to provide  very accurate  tracking  
performance  but at the same time suffer due to computational  re- 
quirements  of online optimisation  ( Besselmann  & Morari,  2009 ). To 
reduce the computational  burden  researchers  use a linear vehicle  
model but such controllers  are applicable  only in linear region of 
vehicle  and tire behaviour  ( Gao et al., 2014; Schildbach  & Borrelli,  
2015 ). Designing  a MPC framework  based on iterative  linearisation  
of a non-linear  model has been proposed  as a way to expand  the 
working  range of linear MPC controllers  for trajectory  tracking  and 
has been experimentally  validated  ( Carvalho  et al., 2013 ). This ap- 
proach  helps in meeting  the compromise  between  computational  
requirements  and modelling  errors. 
Neural network  and fuzzy logic based approaches  have also 
been proposed  in literature  and demonstrate  tracking  performance  
similar  to LQR controllers.  However,  in the absence  of formal sta- 
bility proofs and exception  handling,  such approaches  cannot be 
suggested  for real-world  implementation  ( Chaib, Netto, & Mam- 
mar, 2004; Sorniotti  et al., 2017 ). The advantages  and disadvan-  
tages of the different  controllers  discussed  above are summarised  
in Table 2 . Since, an overtaking  manoeuvre  is not standardised  
84 S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 
and every researcher  demonstrates  their tracking  controller  under 
a unique  setting,  it is diﬃcult  to perform  a direct comparison  be- 
tween the different  controllers  proposed  in literature.  However,  in 
Rupp and Stolz (2017) , ﬁve different  trajectory  tracking  controllers  
(Stanley,  LQR, SMC, Fuzzy, and MPC) were designed  to simulate  
an overtaking  manoeuvre  performed  at 120 km/h. This setup pro- 
vides a basis for direct comparison  of different  control  algorithms  
since they were applied  on an identical  system.  The tracking  per- 
formance  was assessed  by comparing  lateral errors and angular  er- 
rors. Additionally,  the actuation  effort was compared  using steering  
angle induced  during the manoeuvre.  The results from this prelim-  
inary comparison  (i.e., trajectory  tracking,  and actuation)  demon-  
strated  that MPC resulted  in the smallest  tracking  errors (i.e., lat- 
eral position  and heading  angle) with smooth  actuation  of the 
steering  angle. 
All the controllers  discussed  above are validated  in well con- 
trolled environments  where parameter  variations  (e.g., vehicle  
mass, moment  of inertia,  road friction,  etc.) and environmental  un- 
certainties  (e.g., headwind,  tailwind,  etc.) are kept to a minimum.  
While such practices  allow researchers  in benchmarking  different  
controllers,  most of the proposed  controllers  are operational  in a 
narrow  operating  window  which is not a realistic  representation  
of real-world  driving.  The operating  window  of a controller  sub- 
ject to large variations  in system  dynamics  can be increased  in the 
following  three ways: (i) control  robustness  against  all uncertain-  
ties, (ii) design a ‘bank’ of controllers  to cover possible  different  
operational  regimes,  or (iii) update  parameters  in real-time  to pre- 
vent performance  drop-off.  However,  the order of a controller  rises 
with the number  robustness  criteria  that are incorporated  and the 
number  of controllers  in a ‘bank’ scales exponentially  with the 
number  of varying  parameters  making  both these approaches  un- 
viable for practical  application  ( Haﬁzah  et al., 2016 ). On the other 
hand using a V2X system  to update  required  parameters  based on 
the surrounding  conditions  can potentially  provide  a practical  so- 
lution. Some attempts  to use V2X to update  control  parameters  
for improving  tracking  performance  have been presented  in lit- 
erature.  For instance,  in Jong et al. (2016) , an automated  emer- 
gency braking  (AEB) system  that exploits  V2X communication  to 
update  the road friction  co-eﬃcient  parameter  in the control  sys- 
tem model has been proposed.  This allows for modiﬁcation  in real- 
time key constraints  such as minimum  braking  distance  and time- 
to-collision  (TTC) making  the system  suitable  for use under a wider 
range of conditions.  Using a similar  strategy,  a communication  sys- 
tem that updates  the vehicle  model parameters  (e.g., road-friction,  
Jalalmaab,  Pirani, Fidan, & Jeon, 2016 , mass, etc.) and system  con- 
straints  (e.g., road width, speed limit, cross-wind,  traﬃc state and 
future trajectory)  can enhance  the usability  of model based track- 
ing controller  in diverse  driving  conditions.  Hence, V2X commu-  
nication  systems  can update  relevant  parameters  of a controller  
with accurate  and real-time  information  thus preventing  the ap- 
plicability  of a designed  tracking  controller  to be limited  to certain  
pre-set  conditions  and scenarios.  However,  the range of beneﬁts  
(e.g., tracking  performance,  safety improvements,  etc.) that can be 
gained by such a system  needs further  investigation  resulting  in an 
open research  question.  
5. Conclusion  
This paper reviewed  different  approaches  towards  trajectory  
planning  tracking  for autonomous  overtaking.  The review of tra- 
jectory  planning  methods  brings forth the following  important  as- 
pects. First, vehicle  dynamics,  constraints  and surrounding  environ-  
ment information  needs to be considered  while designing  a tra- 
jectory  for an overtaking  manoeuvre  and methods  that incorpo-  
rate these requirements  within their framework  are suitable  can- 
didates  for real-world  applications.  Second,  the trajectory  planning  techniques  depend  on accurate  surrounding  environment  informa-  
tion, and off-board  information  via V2X communication  can aid in 
expanding  the accuracy  and perception  horizon  thereby  reducing  
safety concerns  that might arise due to diverse  driving  conditions.  
For tracking  controllers,  the review showed  that: (i) control  algo- 
rithms that considered  vehicle  and tire dynamics  over large speed 
ranges provided  accurate  tracking  even at high-speeds  and/or large 
trajectory  variations,  and (ii) the effectiveness  of such controllers  
hinges on the accuracy  of the modelled  system  dynamics  which 
has diﬃculty  in capturing  the large variations  encountered  typi- 
cally in daily driving  with one low order system.  Examples  from 
literature  showed  that off-board  information  via V2X systems  can 
be used to update  controller  parameters  in real-time  which can 
prevent  drop-off in  tracking  performance  when operated  in condi- 
tions with variations  in system  dynamics.  However,  integration  of 
off-board  information  into a multi-tier  control  architecture  needs 
to be seamless  as well as capable  of graceful  degradation  on occa- 
sions of wireless  communication  failure.  This added complexity  in 
control  design can pose signiﬁcant  challenges  that will need to be 
addressed  to develop  a safe, dependable,  and robust control  sys- 
tem. 
It is noteworthy  that the study of potential  beneﬁts  that can be 
achieved  by leveraging  off-board  information  via V2X communica-  
tion systems  for autonomous  trajectory  planning  and tracking  is in 
a nascent  stage and marks a new chapter  of study in the ﬁeld of 
autonomous  vehicles.  
Acknowledgement  
This work was supported  by Jaguar Land Rover and the UK- 
EPSRC grant EP/N01300X/1  as part of the jointly funded  Towards  
Autonomy:  Smart and Connected  Control  (TASCC)  Programme.  
References  
Aeberhard,  M. , Rauch, S. , Bahram, M. , Tanzmeister,  G. , Thomas, J. , Pilat, Y. , 
et al. (2015). Experience,  results and lessons learned from automated  driving 
on Germany’s  highways.  IEEE Intelligent  Transportation  Systems Magazine,  7 (1), 
42–57 . 
Andrews,  S. (2012). Vehicle-to-vehicle  (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure  (V2I) 
communications  and cooperative  driving. In Handbook  of intelligent  vehicles 
(pp. 1121–1144).  Springer . 
Ardelt, M. , Coester, C. , & Kaempchen,  N. (2012). Highly automated  driving on free- 
ways in real traﬃc using a probabilistic  framework.  IEEE Transactions  on Intelli- 
gent Transportation  Systems, 13 (4), 1576–1585  . 
Baber, J. , Kolodko,  J. , Noel, T. , Parent, M. , & Vlacic, L. (2005). Cooperative  autonomous  
driving: Intelligent  vehicles sharing city roads. IEEE Robotics & Automation  Mag- 
azine, 12 (1), 44–49 . 
Bahram, M. , Hubmann,  C. , Lawitzky,  A. , Aeberhard,  M. , & Wollherr,  D. (2016). A 
combined  model-and  learning-based  framework  for interaction-aware  maneu- 
ver prediction.  IEEE Transactions  on Intelligent  Transportation  Systems, 17 (6), 
1538–1550  . 
Besselmann,  T. , & Morari, M. (2009). Autonomous  vehicle steering using ex- 
plicit LPV-MPC.  In Proceedings  of the 2009 European  control conference  
(pp. 2628–2633)  . 1. 
Carvalho,  A. , Gao, Y. , Gray, A. , Tseng, H. E. , & Borrelli, F. (2013). Predictive  control of 
an autonomous  ground vehicle using an iterative linearization  approach.  In Pro- 
ceedings of the sixteenth  international  ieee conference  on intelligent  transportation  
systems (ITSC 2013) ITSC (pp. 2335–2340)  . 
Carvalho,  A. , Gao, Y. , Lefevre, S. , & Borrelli, F. (2014). Stochastic  predictive  control 
of autonomous  vehicles in uncertain  environments.  In Proceedings  of the twelfth 
international  symposium  on advanced  vehicle control . November  2016. 
Carvalho,  A. , Lefévre, S. , Schildbach,  G. , Kong, J. , & Borrelli, F. (2015). Automated  
driving: The role of forecasts  and uncertainty  –A control perspective.  European  
Journal of Control, 24 , 14–32 . 
Cesari, G. , Schildbach,  G. , Carvalho,  A. , & Borrelli, F. (2017). Scenario model predic- 
tive control for lane change assistance  and autonomous  driving on highways.  
IEEE Intelligent  Transportation  Systems Magazine,  9 (3), 23–35 . 
Chaib, S. , Netto, M. S. , & Mammar,  S. (2004). Hinf, adaptive,  PID and fuzzy control: 
A comparison  of controllers  for vehicle lane keeping. In Proceedings  of the 2004 
IEEE intelligent  vehicles symposium  (pp. 139–144)  . 
Chu, K. , Lee, M. , & Sunwoo, M. (2012). Local path planning  for off-road autonomous  
driving with avoidance  of static obstacles.  IEEE Transactions  on Intelligent  Trans- 
portation  Systems, 13 (4), 1599–1616  . 
Claussmann,  L. , Carvalho,  A. , & Schildbach,  G. (2015). A path planner for autonomous  
driving on highways  using a human mimicry approach  with binary decision 
S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 85 
diagrams.  In Proceedings  of the 2015 European  control conference,  ECC 2015 
(pp. 2976–2982)  . 
Damerow,  F. , Flade, B. , & Eggert, J. (2016). Extensions  for the foresighted  driver 
model: Tactical lane change, overtaking  and continuous  lateral control. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 2016 IEEE intelligent  vehicles symposium  (IV) (pp. 186–193)  . 
Eggert, J. , Klingelschmitt,  S. , & Damerow,  F. (2015). The foresighted  driver: Future 
ADAS based on generalized  predictive  risk estimation.  In Proceedings  of the 
fast-zero 2015 symposium  (pp. 93–100) . 
Eskandarian,  A. (2012). Handbook  of intelligent  vehicles : 2 . Springer . 
Filev, D. , Lu, J. , & Hrovat, D. (2013). Future mobility:  Integrating  vehicle control with 
cloud computing.  Davor Mechanical  Engineering,  135 (3), 18–24 . 
Gao, Y. , Gray, A. , Frasch, J. V. , Lin, T. , Tseng, E. , Hedrick, J. K. , et al. (2012). Spatial 
predictive  control for agile semi-autonomous  ground vehicles.  In Proceedings  of 
the eleventh international  symposium  on advanced  vehicle control VD11 (pp. 1–6) . 
Gao, Y. , Gray, A. , Tseng, H. E. , & Borrelli, F. (2014). A tube-based  robust nonlinear  
predictive  control approach  to semiautonomous  ground vehicles.  Vehicle System 
Dynamics,  52 (6), 802–823  . 
Ghumman,  U. , Kunwar, F. , & Benhabib,  B. (2008). Guidance-based  on-line motion 
planning  for autonomous  highway  overtaking.  International  Journal on Smart 
Sensing and Intelligent  Systems, 1 (2), 549–571  . 
Glaser, S. , Vanholme,  B. , Mammar,  S. , Gruyer, D. , & Nouvelière,  L. (2010). Maneu- 
ver-based  trajectory  planning  for highly autonomous  vehicles on real road with 
traﬃc and driver interaction.  IEEE Transactions  on Intelligent  Transportation  Sys- 
tems, 11 (3), 589–606  . 
Gordon, T. , & Lidberg, M. (2015). Automated  driving and autonomous  functions  on 
road vehicles.  Vehicle System Dynamics,  53 (7), 958–994  . 
Gray, A. , Gao, Y. , Lin, T. , Hedrick, J. K. , Tseng, H. E. , & Borrelli, F. (2012). Predictive  
control for agile semi-autonomous  ground vehicles using motion primitives.  In 
Proceedings  of the 2012 American  control conference  (ACC) (pp. 4239–4244)  . 
Guzzella,  L. (2009). Automobiles  of the future and the role of automatic  control in 
those systems. Annual Reviews in Control, 33 (1), 1–10 . 
Haﬁzah, N. , Hairi, A. , Hudha, K. , & Abdul, Z. (2016). Modelling  and control strategies  
in path tracking control for autonomous  ground vehicles : A review of state of 
the art and challenges.  Journal of Intelligent  & Robotic Systems, 86 (2), 225–254  . 
Hegeman,  G. , Brookhuis,  K. , & Hoogendoorn,  S. (2005). Opportunities of  advanced  
driver assistance  systems towards overtaking.  EJTIR, 5 (4), 281–296  . 
Houben, C. , & Houben, S. (2015). Endowing  advanced  driver assistance  systems with 
fault tolerance.  Annual Reviews in Control, 39 , 58–67 . 
Huang, Z. , Wu, Q. , Ma, J. , & Fan, S. (2015). An APF and MPC combined  collaborative  
driving controller  using vehicular  communication  technologies.  Chaos, Solitons 
and Fractals, 89 , 232–242  . 
Jalalmaab,  M. , Pirani, M. , Fidan, B. , & Jeon, S. (2016). Cooperative  road condition  
estimation  for an adaptive model predictive  collision avoidance  control strat- 
egy. In Proceedings  of the 2016 IEEE Intelligent  Vehicles Symposium  2016-Augus(Iv  
(pp. 1072–1077)  . 
Jong, J. J. , Park, H. , Chao, H.-c. , & Yen, N. Y. (2016). Advanced  multimedia  and ubiqui- 
tous engineering:  Future information  technology  : 2. Springer . 
Kala, R. , & Warwick,  K. (2013). Motion planning  of autonomous  vehicles in a 
non-autonomous  vehicle environment  without speed lanes. Engineering  Appli- 
cations of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,  26 (5–6), 1588–1601  . 
Kanaris, A. , Kosmatopoulos,  E. B. , & Ioannou,  P. A. (2001). Strategies  and spacing 
requirements  for lane changing  and merging in automated  highway  systems. 
IEEE Transactions  on Vehicular  Technology,  50 (6), 1568–1581  . 
Kang, C. M. , Lee, S. H. , & Chung, C. C. (2014). Comparative  evaluation  of dynamic  and 
kinematic  vehicle models. In Proceedings  of the ﬁfty-third  IEEE annual conference  
on decision and control (CDC) (pp. 648–653)  . 
Karlsson,  J. , Murgovski,  N. , & Sjöberg, J. (2016). Temporal  vs. spatial formulation  of 
autonomous  overtaking  algorithms.  In Proceedings  of the nineteenth  IEEE inter- 
national conference  on intelligent  transportation  systems (ITSC) (pp. 1029–1034)  . 
Katrakazas,  C. , Quddus, M. , Chen, W.-H. , & Deka, L. (2015). Real-time  motion plan- 
ning methods  for autonomous  on-road driving: State-of-the-art  and future 
research directions.  Transportation  Research Part C: Emerging  Technologies,  60 , 
416–442  . 
Kesting, A. , Treiber, M. , & Helbing, D. (2007). General lane-changing  model MOBIL 
for car-following  models. Transportation  Research Record: Journal of Transporta-  
tion Research Board, 1999 (1), 86–94 . 
Khaksar, W. , Sahari, K. S. M. , & Hong, T. S. (2016). Application  of sampling-based  
motion planning  algorithms  in autonomous  vehicle navigation.  Autonomous  Ve- 
hicle chapter 02 . 
Khodayari,  A. , Ghaffari,  A. , Ameli, S. , & Flahatgar,  J. (2010). A historical  review on 
lateral and longitudinal  control of autonomous  vehicle motions.  In Proceedings  
of the 2010 international  conference  on mechanical  and electrical  technology,  ICMET 
2010 (pp. 421–429)  . 
Kim, B. , Kim, D. , Park, S. , Jung, Y. , & Yi, K. (2016). Automated  complex urban driving 
based on enhanced  environment  representation  with GPS/map,  radar, lidar and 
vision. IFAC-PapersOnLine,  49 (11), 190–195 . 
Kim, C.-i. , Kim, M.-s. , & Lee, K.-s. (2015). Development  of a full speed range 
path-following  system for the autonomous  vehicle. In Proceedings  of the 2015 
international  conference  on control, automation  and systems (ICCAS 2015) 15 
(pp. 710–715)  . 
Kitazawa,  S. (2016). Control target algorithm  for direction  control of autonomous  
vehicles in consideration  of mutual accordance  in mixed traﬃc conditions.  In 
Proceedings  of the 2016 international  symposium  on advanced  vehicle control . 
Kong, J. , Pfeiffer, M. , Schildbach,  G. , & Borrelli, F. (2015). Kinematic  and dynamic  
vehicle models for autonomous  driving control design. In Proceedings  of the 2015 
IEEE intelligent  vehicles symposium  (IV) (pp. 1094–1099)  . Kuwata, Y. , Fiore, G. A. , Teo, J. , Frazzoli, E. , & How, J. P. (2008). Motion planning  for 
urban driving using RRT. In Proceedings  of the 2008 IEEE/RSJ international  confer- 
ence on intelligent  robots and systems, IROS (pp. 1681–1686)  . 
Lawitzky,  A. , Althoff, D. , Passenberg,  C. F. , Tanzmeister,  G. , Wollherr,  D. , & 
Buss, M. (2013). Interactive  scene prediction  for automotive  applications.  In Pro- 
ceedings of the 2013 IEEE intelligent  vehicles symposium  (IV) (pp. 1028–1033)  . 
Lefèvre, S. , Vasquez,  D. , & Laugier, C. (2014). A survey on motion prediction  and risk 
assessment  for intelligent  vehicles.  ROBOMECH  Journal, 1 (1) . 
Luo, Y. , Xiang, Y. , Cao, K. , & Li, K. (2016). A dynamic  automated  lane change maneu- 
ver based on vehicle-to-vehicle  communication.  Transportation  Research Part C: 
Emerging  Technologies,  62 , 87–102 . 
Ma, L. , Xue, J. , Kawabata,  K. , Zhu, J. , Ma, C. , & Zheng, N. (2014). A fast RRT algorithm  
for motion planning  of autonomous  road vehicles.  In Proceedings  of the sev- 
enteenth IEEE international  conference  on intelligent  transportation  systems, ITSC 
2014 (pp. 1033–1038)  . 
Milanés, V. , Llorca, D. F. , Villagrá, J. , Pérez, J. , Fernández,  C. , Parra, I. , et al. (2012). In- 
telligent automatic  overtaking  system using vision for vehicle detection.  Expert 
Systems with Applications,  39 (3), 3362–3373  . 
Moridpour,  S. , Rose, G. , & Sarvi, M. (2010). Effect of surrounding  traﬃc character-  
istics on lane changing  behavior.  Journal of Transportation  Engineering,  136 (11), 
973–985  . 
Motro, M. , Chu, A. , Choi, J. , Lavieri, P. S. , Pinjari, A. R. , Bhat, C. R. , et al. (2016). Ve- 
hicular ad-hoc network simulations  of overtaking  maneuvers  on two-lane  rural 
highways.  Transportation  Research Part C: Emerging  Technologies,  72 , 60–76 . 
Murgovski,  N. , & Sjöberg, J. (2015). Predictive  cruise control with autonomous  over- 
taking. In Proceedings  of the IEEE ﬁfty-fourth  annual conference  on decision and 
control (CDC) (pp. 644–649)  . 
Naranjo, J. E. , González,  C. , García, R. , & De Pedro, T. (2008). Lane-change  fuzzy con- 
trol in autonomous  vehicles for the overtaking  maneuver.  IEEE Transactions  on 
Intelligent  Transportation  Systems, 9 (3), 438–450  . 
Nilsson, J. , Gao, Y. , Carvalho,  A. , & Borrelli, F. (2014). Manoeuvre  generation  and con- 
trol for automated  highway  driving. IFAC Proceedings  Volumes, 19 , 6301–6306  . 
IFAC. 
Ohara, N. , Slot, M. , Monteil, J. , Cahill, V. , & Bouroche,  M. (2015). Towards evaluating  
the beneﬁts of inter-vehicle  coordination.  In Proceedings  of the 2015 IEEE confer- 
ence on intelligent  transportation  systems, ITSC (pp. 24 4 4–2450) . 
Pérez, J. , Milanés, V. , Onieva, E. , Godoy, J. , & Alonso, J. (2011). Longitudinal  fuzzy 
control for autonomous  overtaking.  In Proceedings  of the 2011 IEEE international  
conference  on mechatronics,  ICM 2011 (pp. 188–193)  . 
Petrov, P. , & Nashashibi,  F. (2014). Modeling and  nonlinear adaptive  control for au- 
tonomous  vehicle overtaking.  IEEE Transactions  on Intelligent  Transportation  Sys- 
tems, 15 (4), 1643–1656  . 
Radar, 2018. Vehicle Sensor Suite. [Online; accessed  28-February-2018]  
http://images.caricos.com/m/mercedes-benz/2018  _ mercedes-benz  _ s-class/ 
images/160  0x120 0/2018 _ mercedes-benz  _ s-class _ 41 _ 160 0x120 0.jpg . 
Rajamani,  R. (2011). Vehicle dynamics  and control . Springer Science \ Business  Media . 
Rupp, A. , & Stolz, M. (2017). Survey on control schemes  for automated  driving on 
highways.  In Automated  driving (pp. 43–69). Springer . 
Saengpredeekorn,  P. , & Srinonchat,  J. (2009). A new technique  to deﬁne the over- 
take distance using image processing.  In Proceedings  of the sixth international  
conference  on electrical  engineering/electronics,  computer,  telecommunications  and 
information  technology:  02 (pp. 1142–1145)  . 
Schildbach,  G. , & Borrelli, F. (2015). Scenario model predictive  control for lane 
change assistance  on highways.  In Proceedings  of the 2015 IEEE intelligent  ve- 
hicles symposium  (pp. 611–616)  . 
Schildbach,  G. , Fagiano, L. , Frei, C. , & Morari, M. (2014). The scenario approach  for 
stochastic  model predictive  control with bounds on closed-loop  constraint  vio- 
lations. Automatica,  50 (12), 3009–3018  . 
Schildbach,  G. , & Gmbh, E. F. (2016). A new nonlinear  model predictive  control al- 
gorithm for vehicle path tracking.  In Proceedings  of the 2016 International  sym- 
posium on advanced  vehicle control . 
Schubert,  R. , Adam, C. , Obst, M. , Mattern,  N. , Leonhardt,  V. , & Wanielik,  G. (2011). 
Empirical  evaluation  of vehicular  models for ego motion estimation.  In Proceed- 
ings of the 2011 IEEE Intelligent  Vehicles Symposium  IV (pp. 534–539)  . 
Schubert,  R. , Richter, E. , & Wanielik,  G. (2008). Comparison  and evaluation  of ad- 
vanced motion models for vehicle tracking.  In Proceedings  of the eleventh inter- 
national conference  on information  fusion (pp. 1–6) . 1. 
Schubert,  R. , Schulze, K. , & Wanielik,  G. (2010). Situation  assessment  for automatic  
lane-change  maneuvers.  IEEE Transactions  on Intelligent  Transportation  Systems, 
11 (3), 607–616 . 
Shamir, T. (2004). How should an autonomous  vehicle overtake  a slower moving 
vehicle: Design and analysis of an optimal trajectory.  IEEE Transactions  on Auto- 
matic Control, 49 (4), 607–610 . 
Shim, T. , Adireddy,  G. , & Yuan, H. (2012). Autonomous  vehicle collision avoidance  
system using path planning  and model-predictive-control-based  active front 
steering and wheel torque control. Proceedings  of the Institution  of Mechanical  
Engineers,  Part D: Journal of Automobile  Engineering,  226 (6), 767–778  . 
Snider, J. M. (2009). Automatic  steering methods  for autonomous  automobile  path 
tracking.  Technical  report CMU-RITR-09-08  . Pittsburgh,  PA: Robotics Institute . 
Son, Y. S. , Kim, W. , Lee, S. H. , & Chung, C. C. (2015). Robust multirate  control scheme 
with predictive  virtual lanes for lane-keeping  system of autonomous  highway  
driving. IEEE Transactions  on Vehicular  Technology,  64 (8), 3378–3391  . 
Sorniotti,  A. , Barber, P. , & Pinto, S. D. (2017). Path tracking for automated  driving: 
A tutorial on control system formulations  and ongoing research.  In Automated  
driving: Safer and more eﬃcient future driving (pp. 71–140).  Springer . 
Tagne, G. , Talj, R. , & Charara, A. (2016). Design and comparison of  robust nonlinear  
86 S. Dixit et al. / Annual Reviews in Control 45 (2018) 76–86 
controllers  for the lateral dynamics  of intelligent  vehicles.  IEEE Transactions  on 
Intelligent  Transportation  Systems, 17 (3), 796–809  . 
Thiemann,  C. , Treiber, M. , & Kesting, A. (2008). Estimating  acceleration  and 
lane-changing  dynamics  based on NGSIM trajectory  data. Transportation  Re- 
search Record: Journal of the Transportation  Research Board, 2088 , 90–101 . 
Toledo, T. , Koutsopoulos,  H. , & Ben-Akiva,  M. (2003). Modeling  integrated  
lane-changing  behavior.  Transportation  Research Record: Journal of the Trans- 
portation  Research Board, 1857 (03), 30–38 . 
Ulbrich, S. , & Maurer, M. (2015). Towards tactical lane change behavior  planning  for 
automated  vehicles.  In Proceedings  of the eighteenth  IEEE international  conference  
on intelligent  transportation  systems (ITSC) (pp. 989–995)  . 
Usman, G. , & Kunwar, F. (2009). Autonomous  vehicle overtaking  –a n online solu-  
tion. In Proceedings  of the 2009 IEEE international  conference  on automation  and 
logistics, ICAL 2009 (pp. 596–601)  . 
Valldorf, J. , & Gessner, W. (2005). Advanced  microsystems  for automotive  applications  . 
Springer . 
Vanholme,  B. , Gruyer, D. , Lusetti, B. , Glaser, S. , & Mammar,  S. (2013). Highly auto- 
mated driving on highways  based on legal safety. IEEE Transactions  on Intelligent  
Transportation  Systems, 14 (1), 333–347  . 
Vlahogianni,  E. I. (2013). Modeling  duration  of overtaking  in two lane highways.  
Transportation  Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology  and Behaviour,  20 , 135–146 . 
Wan, L. , Raksincharoensak,  P. , Maeda, K. , & Nagai, M. (2011). Lane change behavior  
modeling  for autonomous  vehicles based on surroundings  recognition.  Interna- 
tional Journal of Automotive  Engineering,  2 , 7–12 . 
Watzenig,  D. , & Brandstätter,  B. (2017). Comprehensive  energy management:  Eco rout- 
ing & velocity proﬁles . Springer . Webster,  N. A. , Suzuki, T. , Chung, E. , & Kuwahara,  M. (2007). Tactical driver lane 
change model using forward search. In Proceedings  of the eighty-sixth  annual 
meeting on transportation  research board (pp. 07–0378)  . 
Werling, M. , Ziegler, J. , Kammel,  S. , & Thrun, S. (2010). Optimal trajectory  generation  
for dynamic  street scenarios  in a frenét frame. In Proceedings  of the 2010 IEEE 
international  conference  on robotics and automation  (ICRA) (pp. 987–993)  . 
Wolf, M. T. , & Burdick, J. W. (2008). Artiﬁcial  potential  functions  for highway  driving 
with collision avoidance.  In Proceedings  of the IEEE international  conference  on 
robotics and automation  (pp. 3731–3736)  . 
Wymeersch,  H. , De Campos, G. R. , Falcone, P. , Svensson,  L. , & Ström, E. G. (2015). 
Challenges  for cooperative  ITS: Improving  road safety through the integration  
of wireless communications,  control, and positioning.  In Proceedings  of the 2015 
international  conference  on computing,  networking  and communications  (ICNC) 
(pp. 573–578)  . 
You, F. , Zhang, R. , Lie, G. , Wang, H. , Wen, H. , & Xu, J. (2015). Trajectory  planning  
and tracking control for autonomous  lane change maneuver  based on the co- 
operative  vehicle infrastructure  system. Expert Systems with Applications,  42 (14), 
5932–5946  . 
